This is Jocco podcast number 24 with echo Charles and me, Jocco willing.
And our guest tonight is Jodi Middick.
Jodi is a former Canadian Army soldier and sniper who served in Afghanistan.
He now serves as an elected member of the Ottawa City Council.
You got second place in a show called the Amazing Race.
He authored a bestselling book about his experiences.
He's a husband and a dad.
Beyond all that, Jodi is a real hero.
An absolute inspiration to anybody that knows his story,
which is what we'll be talking about tonight.
Welcome to the show, Jodi.
Thank you, Jocco.
Did I miss anything?
Jocco, make a fan?
Thanks, man.
Now I appreciate that.
Also with us is echo Charles.
Good evening, echo.
Good evening.
Now, before we dig into your book,
I wanted to start off with an excerpt of a poem by Richard Kippling.
And it's called the Young British Soldier.
And I think this is a little bit appropriate since Canada's former part of the Commonwealth of England
and now part of the Commonwealth.
And while Kippling was never actually a soldier, he did attend the United Service College in England,
which kind of prepared young men for the Army,
although he never joined, but he did spend many years abroad in the British colonies.
And he also lost his only son, John, in World War I,
at the Battle of Luz, in September of 1915,
where there was just about a hundred thousand casualties,
in a matter of days, John Kippling was last seen,
lurching through the mud blindly, crying out in agony.
After his face had been ripped apart by an exploding shell.
And this poem that I'm about to read a part of is not about World War I.
It's about the British wars that took place from the 1830s to the early 1900s
in a part of the world called Afghanistan.
And here is this latter part of that poem.
When first under fire and you're wishful to duck,
don't look or take heed at the man that is struck,
be thankful you're living and trust to your luck,
and march to your front like a soldier,
front front front like a soldier.
If your officers dead in the sergeants look white,
remember it's a ruin to run from a fight,
so take open order, lie down and sit tight,
and wait for supports like a soldier,
wait, wait, wait like a soldier.
When you're wounded and left on Afghanistan's planes,
and the women come out to cut up what remains,
just roll to your rifle and blow out your brains,
and go to your God like a soldier,
go go go like a soldier.
And I think that poem sets a tone for what kind of a place
to Afghanistan can be.
Yeah.
It's been a while to hear that.
That last line's not a joke either.
No, it isn't.
I'm going to get there in your book here in a minute.
Your book is called Unflinching.
This is the book right here.
And I kind of made that connection with the Unflinching part.
You've been a sniper.
You obviously can't be flinching when you're taking a shot.
Right.
And this whole thing kicks off the first chapter,
which the name of the first chapter is awesome,
because this is something that I believe is something
that a lot of people have. I know I damn sure did.
The first chapter is called The Soldier in the Child.
And I think that describes a lot of people that joined the military.
Yeah.
That's the thing that's in there.
They're born with it.
You were born with it.
I know I was born with it.
Yeah.
Tell everyone to do.
Believe me.
Now your mom, how did she feel about all that?
She resisted like any 80s mom, right?
You're a hell do you again?
44.
So you're a little older than I am,
but my mom being a foster kid,
read all the books and all the books the time said,
boy should play with Barbies and girls.
You play with Tanka Trucks and treat them gender neutral and blah, blah, blah,
but guess what?
If you put boys in a room and girls in a room with toys,
the boys play with Tanka Trucks and the girls play with the Barbies.
I just the way it is.
Yeah.
And my fact my son,
I had two daughters that were young
and our house and I didn't want them.
I'm not going to have them have all these Barbies.
I don't even know where they came from.
But they showed up at my house.
Yeah.
I guess what?
My son was born and I was all worried.
He's going to be playing with Barbies.
That kid, he had kid didn't care about Barbies.
He didn't care about all.
They didn't look at him.
He anything that had wheels on it.
Yeah.
It's just, and it's just,
boys and girls are different.
Yeah.
They're just different.
And, you know what,
I know lots of women that are great soldiers.
I'm not saying that they don't have it.
But mom wanted, you know,
no guns, GI Joe's, but no,
you know, couldn't keep the weapons.
And, you know, and I, and I love her for it because
Who knows who I would have been if she had,
maybe if she had fostered it,
it would have, it would have fizzled out.
I don't know.
But yeah, all I want to do is soldier.
Since I was a, since I was a little boy.
So your mom had that attitude and then along came Uncle Jim.
Yeah.
Uncle Jim.
They don't tell us a little bit about Uncle Jim.
Well, I mean,
I just saw him the last week and actually he lives in Victoria.
We're, we're Mr. Echo is born and he,
when you're a child, right?
There's nothing more impressionable than a three year old.
Really, right?
And when I was three, he would back then.
If you were in uniform, you could ride the train for free
and get the bus for free.
And so he would ride the train in uniform when he had his,
leave.
And he'd show up at the house and he'd bring me teddy bears.
And I was like, this is obviously the coolest dude ever.
And whatever he does, I want to do it.
And he would tell stories about what he did, you know,
and he was, you know, he was an infantry soldier.
Same regiment that I joined.
And, and that was the seed.
I assume no one really knows.
This is just family lore.
Right.
Where, because mom didn't like it.
Dad was a blue collar, auto worker.
His dad was in the army,
but it was like conscripted into the Serbian border guard.
When the, when the, when the German army showed up,
he basically threw his hands up.
Was like, yep, I'm cool.
Don't shoot.
You know, mom's dad apparently was in the army,
but no one knows because he died when she was 10.
No one's really sure what he did.
You know, apparently he was in Korea,
but there's no record of it.
So, anyway, it's just,
it was there.
And Jim, I think, was the catalyst.
That sparked it.
It sparked it when I was just a young little impressionable boy.
That happens.
Now, when you've got to be a teenager.
You know, you kind of sounded in the book.
You sound like, yes, you sound like a teenager.
Yeah.
And I mean, just to go here in your book,
you say, I was a loner who didn't fit in.
I still dreamt of being in the army,
probably because I wanted to belong to something.
Yeah.
And it was definitely clear I didn't belong in school.
I hated school.
I hate, especially because when you get to high school,
and I don't know how you guys,
I've heard you talk a little bit about it.
It sounded like you had the same issues.
Couldn't connect with any of your teachers.
The only teacher I remember I had this one teacher.
I forget his name, but he was Scottish originally.
And he was my history teacher.
Like the only subject I cared about was history, really.
And he would tell stories about everything else he ever did in life
before he was a teacher.
And I was like, okay, this guy actually has some shit
that I need to hear because he's been around the world
and he's done everything.
The rest of them.
I joined, I don't know if he came to teach you how to call it.
I didn't know how to type.
And I'd be like, why am I even here?
What am I doing here?
Doing math?
I, you know, snipers, you know,
we eat ballistic charts for breakfast.
And math was useless to me in high school.
And yeah, I just delass thing I wanted to be was in school.
And I actually, because this was the 90s, right?
So that was still when you could quit school to join the army.
And I was like, oh, I'm just going to quit school and join the army.
And my parents, like, basically had to beg me to stay.
They let me join the reserves, which in Canada is called the militia.
And it's like, once a week and a week and a month.
And they're like, you can do that, but don't quit school.
Finish school.
All right.
But it was like completely against my will.
But they finally got you, they finally let you join.
You joined the militia.
Right.
And then, but you weren't still in acupuncturne.
Well, the militia in Canada, you can be called up to active duty.
But it's not like we chatted a little bit about this on the way here where you guys
have a different system here because yours is much bigger.
But also like the militia in Canada was the military before World War Two, basically.
So regiments were local.
It was a part-time thing.
You know, it was kind of like, it was the what is that?
What do they call it?
The citizen soldier.
And the regular army was just there to kind of give them an enemy force and take care of the machine guns and the howitzers.
Like, that doesn't there so that we had at the time.
And it wasn't until after World War Two that it flipped because it was, you know, the Cold War started in all that jazz.
So, you know, at any time, the regular army now into the 90s could say, you know what?
We need 10 reserve soldiers to fill in a platoon here.
And if you could volunteer, and I remember when I showed up to my reserve unit, there were sergeants sewing private stripes under their uniform because they were called up to the regular army.
But you're not a sergeant.
You're like, you're qualified because to keep guys in the reserves, they promote them fast.
But when you go work with the regs, like they're not going to call you a sergeant, you've been in as long as corporal Smith.
Uh-huh, private stripes, bitch. But guys, guys would fight each other to get those slots though.
Because there was nothing better, more honorable than to deploy with a reg for his regiment.
Absolutely.
And go, you know, peacekeeping, but you know, there are still a few gun fights here and there.
I thought this was cool in the book. You talked about this here.
You're basically starting boot camp.
And you say, you just get your haircut.
Yeah.
Get your head shaved for the first time.
Once the barber was done, I studied myself and his mirror.
I barely recognized the young man staring back at me.
The eyes were the same, but everything else was different.
I wasn't jody-middick.
Lay about loaner, high school, good for nothing.
Another floundering adolescent with no ambition and no life plan.
That kid was lying under a pile of hair on the floor.
Looking back at me was jody-middick soldier in training.
I was good boss.
So legit.
Yeah.
Well, so I had, at the time, lethal weapon, too, was my favorite movie ever.
So I had like attempted.
You're a straight male Gibson hero.
Oh, dude.
It was glorious.
Oh, you should have seen it.
Oh, it's next.
Yeah. Oh, yeah.
We've walked around smoking cigarettes and pretend.
Yeah, anyway, just being ridiculous.
But, you know, it happened to me again recently because I had grown my beard out
and I had a bit of, I had some long hair and I did, I did it.
I shaved the beard down to nothing and I went to the barber who usually, like,
does his best to give me a little bit of length, but still make me look professional.
And I said, I want you to give me a number one all around.
That's what I'm talking about.
And this was just, this was just like a month ago.
And, you know, he did all that.
You know, your skin feels cold because now the air is on it and I looked in the mirror
and it was almost the same feeling I went, oh, oh, there he is.
I was like, there's that soldier.
And I remember the feeling because it was the guy's name was Markle.
He was the Italian guy who cut my hair.
And he couldn't believe it because he had fostered this ridiculous
mullet for the last two years.
And now I said shave it off because I showed him a picture of a marine.
And I want to look like this guy.
And when he shaved it and then it,
it was like, I was at the starting line of like the biggest race I'd ever
going to run in my life.
And all I could think about was getting to the end and being successful.
And it changed my life, man.
It changed my life.
Yeah, you know, one thing that, because when I was a kid, you know, I was into,
this is going a little bit tangential.
But I was into the hardcore scene on the East Coast.
Yes, hardcore music. That's what I grew up with.
And it was like, yeah, shaved heads, getting after it.
But one of my best friend at the time, he's like, listen, you know,
where part of this, where there's nowhere to hide.
You can't hide behind your bangs.
It's all right there. You got to face yourself.
Nice.
And it also strips away, you know, any kind of, I mean, hair is basically,
what's that word?
It's basically for show.
I mean, what hair is?
It's just, it won't beなる.
Side.
Because of the hair is, it stands out like normal fashion.
So, you know, the hair isn't a alchemist.
It's organized?
So, you know, I know that I've never actually smoked a shots ever.
So, I, there is no purpose other than I look good.
So, let's just go ahead and remove that.
I don't care what I look like.
I'm here to win.
So, yeah, I guess that may dissplay my hair cut.
And so.
But it, um, I'm glad you picked that sight that that paragraph because
when I did this a month ago is, when I started my training for well,
I know how to eat well. I know how to work out of a workout. I was like 16
But I just wasn't it wasn't clicking you know, and I went the barber and I did that and it was like the switch went off
Boom and there it was. It was like oh I'm back at that starting line
I'm gonna be 40 in January. So I want a six pack before I'm 40. I don't know. So it's like I blown up. I haven't had one
That's been 10 years
Right on all right. So now we get into this next section now you're kind of
Learning about what the army's like and here's some stuff that you said about it
There was a system for everything in the army a way to stand and a way to sit a way to dress and a way to sleep
There's also a way to a system for how to properly eat at the mess hall
Our routine was an endless monotonous cycle. We woke up made our cops folded our sleeping bags in the exact way we'd been taught
Once the tent was in shape it was on the barracks box
Barric boxes we had to lay them out as instructed with everything in its proper place
Whether it made sense or not we had to stand beside our kit and cops everyone perfectly still as the officer did inspection
At the time I thought that so much of this discipline was overkill
Why did we have to stand to detention when the officer was on the other side of the tent looking at some other dudes cotton kit?
Why did our barracks boxes have to be identical?
It took me a couple years to figure out that the skills they were drilling into us are actually really important for a combat leader
If you can't still stand still long enough for morning inspection
How can your commanders trust you to hold your post during a mortar barrage?
How will a leader know he can count on you to be a useful soldier if you can't even follow through on an order
meant to keep you in your comrades safe even if you don't know it at the time all these drills were training me to put self-discipline
above my instinct to flinch or flee
When everything in me told me to break my posture to stand down
I learned to obey a different order instead
It was basic training but I was assimilating some important skills that would later make me a better sniper
Now I talk about discipline all the time and that's obviously why I honed in on this because you kind of captured
The kind of things that they're teaching you discipline
They're teaching you discipline and if you don't make that connection for all you young troopers out there that are getting ready to join the military
There's a purpose there's a reason behind it
A definite purpose
And you know that's part of my book is the book that I wrote with Lave
You know, I just wanted to call this a clinical freedom. There's another chapter in there. It happens to be called cover and move
Yeah, and
You know, we related to everything we do to me. There's no other tactic and again, I had to call this out in your book and by the way, I'm reading your book right now
And I was trying to figure out how to do this. Yeah, like should I say, okay, can you read this section and then I thought to myself
It's going to be different for you to hear it
Coming from someone else to hear the words and when I looked up at you after reading that first section I was like he just enjoyed that
I did
Yeah, because you're hearing it. You can't you can never hear it when you hear yourself read it. You're it's like I don't know I have my own reaction because they're my words
But especially from someone like like you someone who shared
Relatively common experiences
And you know, I was a snab or team leader. You were a you were a task force leader and for us to have a similar reaction to the same types of things is it's very interesting for me to see as well to see someone like
Like, jacco read the same thing that I went through and go, yes, exactly because you got it. It took me a couple years to realize like I said
Why am I standing here? This is stupid. This is because just go out. Let's just go with their entrain what you are training bitch
You're learning how to do what you're told and you're learning how to back because if you take off from your barracks box
Well, guess who's going to pay for it the guy next to you and you know beyond doing what you're told even in that paragraph you pointed out look the the inspectors look in the other direction
You could easily break your posture. Yeah, you know, he's not going to see you. He's never going to catch you, but guess what you held the line. Yeah, you held the line
And that's what you're learning is that no matter what no matter what people are looking at or not you're going to do your job that you're duty right it's your job. It's the job right it's the job and people
What makes a good soldier at someone who understands their job is to be that soldier and I know okay
I know what I'm saying and you know what I'm saying, but you got to go through that to really understand it and me and you can give advice all day to people like new new guys we get
When you tweeted out I was coming oh, I'm getting ready to go on selection. I'm getting ready to go to just I want to be a sniper. I'm joining the infantry. What do I do? What do I do?
I can give you advice all day. Jockel can give you advice all day, but man there's something you just got to learn on your own and that's that standing there with your boots polished at full at you know standing at the child
Wondering why you had to iron your shirt again is going to help you later on when you're under enemy machine gun fire and mortars are coming down trust me. That's just going to help you
But you're going to learn that on your own.
Now back to cover move. Here you go talking about cover move in our pairs one guy would move forward while the other guy would shoot to provide cover the move would yell moving and jump up and move forward about three steps saying it is head up he sees me down
While as partner covered him at down the mover would take cover going to ground taking up a firing position and yelling covering once in position
Then his partner would move forward the same way the idea was to always have a foot on the ground which means one soldier is covering while the other is moving boom
And you said to break that out on your own team at work now in the civilian sector right
Yeah, yeah, we had lunch and the best thing I got out of reading your book
My transition was a weird one. Okay politics is not business, but there are some business aspects and that I am now dealing with people that aren't
You know, I'm used to working in small teams with people that are professionals at what we do you know so snipers and even though that was 10 years ago that's basically my last real working environment
That's what you know is that's what I know so if even if I'm the boss and you're my sniper and I go echo I need you to take up this position I can go away come back that position's taken
But when you're dealing with civilian staff who have never operated in that kind of or we say operated they've never worked in that kind of environment
If I tell them to do something and walk away you better come back and check because they're not used to that kind of freedom because it's discipline but it's you're giving them I'm giving you the freedom to do the job I gave you
You don't need me to double check that you took up the proper sniper position
And then also the fire and the cover and move the foot on the ground I realized after reading your book I went so jocco just
Basically was like listen dummy that's how I felt I felt like a dummy. I'm like of course I should have implemented this in the office
My people were operating in silos because I had my my because I'm the sports commissioner for the city so I had a sports
One of my assistants was on sports one of my assistants was on pop the policy one of my assistants was on
Con constituency work and that's where you deal with the the voters who call it
But none of them were talking to each other and I was only talking to them sporadically
So I said okay guys from
Starting today I didn't tell them why though. I wasn't like I wasn't gonna say hey this guy jocco gave me an idea. I said hey guys. I got an idea
From now on CC you're gonna CC him and you're gonna CC him back whenever you send an email
And then I'm gonna CC you and you're gonna CC me
Within that week our productivity like 100% improvement because now instead of everyone was just aware of what what the others were doing and and their things that
I
Already know but now I got to learn to apply them in my civilian life
Because I'm not working with highly trained snipers anymore. I'm working with people that are good at their jobs
But not necessarily the way that I expect them to be and
It you know there's so much we were talking about it right before we pressed record about
Why is you your the last podcast was the art of war and and and to us it's kind of like a duck you know Joe Rogan says all the time. It's a duh
That's a duh thing but
There's so much you can take from that book and up and there's a reason why fortune 500 CEOs keep it in their desk because it you can apply a lot of what Sun Sioux said
3000 years ago to right now and just your daily life to your interactions with your kids interactions with your your boss or your subordinates or your supplier or your you know your your colleagues
It's all right there. It's just you got a translate it, you know, it's not
Difficult ground. It's you know, it's a position you have to take on an issue
So
Yeah, like I get I get it's a trip to me this whole life this whole thing. It's a it's human nature. Yeah, that that thread of human nature runs through
From 25 hundred years ago, it's on Sioux through war through life through business through the relationships that you now have with your kids. Yeah, it's everywhere
Kid
Now you since you were a militia you actually went back to school after you went to boot camp. Yeah, so you get back to school. This is very typical
Before militia training, I'd been so bored at school and found everything tedious and pointless but after eight weeks of soldier training school seemed like a breeze
I started arriving on time and paying attention to lessons in the military you can direct your career according to your aptitudes and interests
So I decided to do the same at school instead of taking classes I hated I picked ones. I knew I would enjoy my grades improved because I was doing more of what I wanted to do
For the first time I had discipline and self direction
And instead of all that energy being repressed or coming out the wrong way I had focus I went from being a loner and keeping to myself to becoming more outgoing and popular at school
That discipline goes a long way
It really goes along and see I went to college after I'd been in the seal teams for eight years. No, sorry 10 years
So when I went to college I was like, oh, bring it bring it on. I've got to study every little thing you say and I'm going to know it better than you
But I found I was a better student after going through boot camp and basic training and just like learning became easier. Yeah, oh, yeah
Even if I didn't want to know what they were talking about. Yeah, and that's something that the army poses on you is that will teach you something
For the first time you because in civilian world on your kid they go, you got to learn this and you don't study and next thing you know you don't really know it
Then you take the test and you fail and you're like, oh, I'm not smart. I'm going to the army like, no, you will learn this
And then you learn it and you say, oh, okay, that's how I learned I actually have to apply myself and study and now I'm going to get an A
Which is awesome. So then now you still weren't active in the military and you want to get your factory work on
Yeah, well, I was I was as active as I had to be because it's you know, it's part time right, right, and then you know, there was a girl
Just beautiful Russian girlfriend and you know, dad got me a great paying job
But I'll let you say yeah, no, that's that's good and then finally you were like, okay, I'm ready to
I mean you worked in that factory situation for so long that you said I'm going to go well, that's about a year and I was making money that like it was like 25 bucks an hour
I was 19 was a 96 I think and I hated it. I'm sorry dad if you're if you hear this because he got me the job, but it was his parent company because he was an union using the we had the Canadian auto worker
down here with it's the United Auto Workers
and
just it just it just it was soul crushing for me for me and nothing against guys I can do it
There are guys that have worked there 30 years. They put the same rivet in over and over and over again for eight hours a day
And they're masters at it and they love it and they punch their card and they go home and they do their thing wasn't for joty
I know so you get back you now you go full active duty. Yes, come yeah you become a soldier by profession right so I I do what we call a transfer to the regular force and then on top of that usually you're supposed to go through training again
depending on your level of experience because I was only both three years so I should have gone through
What what back what's called battle school and that's that's the regular armies
battle school to become an infantry soldier for whatever reason the decision was made that I wouldn't
Okay, so you don't go back in and but you're our back active duty and now you think that joty was all super square to wait now, but you weren't for you
Well, it was a rough transition jocco and
Yeah, that came after
Yeah, we don't you're actually do you right well, yeah, I'm a full time private I was a corporal in the reserves right busted back down to private
Show up there's a lot of politics going on
Right now and at this time because the regular armies being told it has to take reserves
Whereas before it was like if you need them you can take them now it's even if you don't need them
You're going to take 30%
So you have a battalion of infantry guys. Let's say one RCR at full strength is usually at this time. It was about 700
Cut 30% off of active duty good to go guys and now they're put aside and 30% reserve is show up to take their spot out. Yeah, so
That and this was mandated by our headquarters and so the politics within the unit was kind of we're allowed to swear on this right?
Yeah, the red forest guys are all like fuck you and the horse you came in on and and that horse is mom and anybody else associated with that horse
I show up they thought because I was it they thought I was a reserve because the RCR has a reserve battalion
So they thought I was a reserve RCR and then when they found out I was a direct entry which means I go directly from the reserves into the Reg force without going through the RCR battle school
Huh, so they just gave you that cat badge
Well, yeah, but I did basic training in the reserves
Three years ago
Oh, you did huh and I got man it was rough. It was a rough, but it and it got rough because you got in trouble
Yeah, yeah, so I don't know why you by the way just so you know you wrote this in the book that's been published. Yeah acting like this didn't happen
Now's a little bit too late. You got arrested. I did get arrested. I don't trust anyone who hasn't at least been handcuffed. Yeah, that's good point right
I made a mistake so we were now I the preamble to this was that I did eventually get sent to the RCR battles and that's where I did get arrested
Another one of the trainees and I well the whole platoon went out of course being young men. We somehow found ourselves at a gentleman's nightclub
And we were enjoying our evening and one of the guys who decided he wanted to get some cocaine and I was held by 20
I had never even seen this stuff except for in Miami, vice
And I'm like what's the point we're already here. We're having fun. I've already got a few drinks got some girls sitting with us why why leave
And he was adamant so I guess in his civilian life this was something he got got into
And in my mind I was just like okay, so he's gonna like leave on his own and go somewhere where again like in Miami, vice
It's always like the worst part of town. Guess what it was the worst part of town
So I'm like okay, I'm gonna go with you. I don't I don't need any but but I'll be there in case they try to mug your jump. Yeah
Or jump yeah turns out he was buying it from an undercover cop because you know like who else you're gonna buy it off right and then when after they bust us
So we're like walking back to the club and like okay finally right I can get back and start hanging with the girls again
So I get my drink on we get tackled by guys bigger than you and I and like they're the so they're the under the the night guys
And they're like what do you do and you create they look at our idea. You're guys are in the army and you're going to smoke crack and I'm like
What I look at the guy I'm like what's he talking about he's like well I might have
They might not have had any coax I might have bought and I'm like oh my gosh, I'm just like
But now that's the reality of my life right and I can't there's no going back. There's no changing it and it was it was
It was at the time I described it as the worst year of my life
But maybe it was the best the subsequent year because it taught me a lot about myself
Yeah, and that's the main reason why I kind of wanted to tell that yeah, I wanted you to talk about that because
Number one like you said it's a mistake that you made that
You know I've had that feeling to before where you're you're just like okay, this is my reality now. There's no you can't go backwards. You're cuffed
Yeah, and yet
You had you transition from it and in the book here's how you kind of talk about that transition because they're going to send you back to
Meford. What's it meford meford was the battle school? So they're going to send you to the battle school for another crack at it
Your third crack. Well, my second crack at battle school, but my third
Infantry course
So here's what you did and by the way you were teeter tottering this whole time
They don't know if they're going to kick you out they might let you in because just to everybody knows the cops even took your side
And you know they said hey this guy didn't have anything to do with it, but didn't matter the military will sometimes
guilty by association. Yeah, so the the the the the the the police department was like jodie you clearly
Had nothing to do with it, but yeah guilty by association right and so
They go back and forth find the you get orders. Okay. We're going to let you stay in and now you say this. I had two choices
I could be pissed off forever and feel hard done by or I could go back to Meford with a new attitude and make the best of it
I could keep my head high and get off the bus with the shiniest boots the best press uniform the best laid out kit and the best attitude and being the best shape of anybody there
And that's what you did so I did
So anybody that's out there that's listening to this podcast that hit a little bump in the road. That's what you do
You show up with the best attitude the best shape
With your head held high and you get after it extreme ownership you got to own it. Yeah, there's no hiding from it
There's no explaining your way out of it. There's no side no sideways maneuver you're going to make your that guy
I was that guy. Oh, there's that guy. Yeah, so now fast forward a little bit
You deploy now you're now your legit part of the regiment. Yep finally and you deploy to Kosovo which at the time was a real world mission
I'm sure you were fired up. I know I would have been fired. I think go to Kosovo, but I would have been fired up to go to Kosovo
Oh, because it was the only game in town. I still remember when our seat when our commanding officer said he got we gathered up in the parade hall and he said
When our CR is going to Kosovo and I still remember I was, you know, you know, you know, I have it at ease. You got your hand behind your back
My hand went into a fist and I had to stop myself from doing a fist bump. I was like, yeah, you were going to become James Bond Chuck Norris and Rambo all
One moment is going to be glorious
So you go to Kosovo and and you know what we're kind of joking about it, but it was a legit mission at the time there was there was stuff that was happening there
I like this little section here. You got you're talking about the Russians because your station near some Russian folks and you said this we like to think we're tough as Canadians
But it turned out this Russian unit where we're Russian airborne who'd come from the fighting in Cheshnia
And we've gone into some pretty good days talking about Cheshnia. We talked about Cheshnia in here
These guys took things to a whole new level. They were hardcore soldiers. We would complain when our showers weren't giving us warm water
Then we'd look over to the Russian camp and see soldiers outside in minus 25 degrees washing themselves with snow
Or out in t-shirts cutting firewood
These guys were sleeping in a world war two air attempts
While we were sweating inside our heated barracks and every morning they'd be outside in the ball freezing cold running
Doing chin-ups and bench pressing big truck tires
These guys were legit. Yeah, yeah, and we didn't know there is some there was some stuff going on at the
Pristina airport at that time. That's why they were there. Do you remember do you remember this situation at all?
So NATO did its bombing thing, right? Bomb the Syrians out of Kosovo basically
And then it was like okay, so a NATO stabilization for his K4 the Kosovo stable is whatever it was
Was going to move in and you know everyone was going to get a sector British Russian or British Canadian French Bobbubla
Right as we're like loading up on our vehicles that brigade or I don't know how many big it was of Russians just basically showed up
In the middle of the night at the Pristina airport, which was also a military airport
And they set up a perimeter around this like mountain bunker in there which just recently I read an article about it and they were like yeah
Hey guys, it's been however it's been 20 years. This is what was in there
Oh shit. It was full of stuff that shouldn't have been there. So that's that's why everybody was like what are they doing here? Why do they only want to be there?
Because they were like yeah, we're here to help guys. We're just going to be right here in this area. Don't ever come in here or we'll or we'll kill you
But we'll be right here. We're just here to help. Don't big deal. We want to we want to be part of the part of the exercise
But they were there to guard this this like bunker and there is like a lot of there is like I guess there is some nuclear biological weapons in there and and some migs
That should never have been in that part of Europe apparently and in the middle of the night you'd hear planes taking off and nobody knew what they were
But you know nothing really of substantial events happened in Kosovo
You get home from that and this is when you get the opportunity to go to sniper training, which is
You know outstanding and and I thought you did a great job here of pointing out what a
Snipers because people have little ideas in their heads about what a sniper is and here's jodys version of what a sniper is a
True sniper is someone who's willing to do pretty much anything to accomplish the mission
The sniper has a particular mindset and shooting is actually one of the easier parts of the role
I've seen men at the rifle range who are amazing marksmen, but who would be terrible snipers because they don't have the patience they lack the ability to deny their own needs and to put the mission first
A true sniper will make himself uncomfortable just to make the shot
That is something so true the guys think that the that what a sniper is someone that shoots really well
Yeah, that's that's the least that's the easiest thing I can teach you right if I need you to be a sniper that's the easiest thing I can get you to do you know the movie shooter
With our buddy Mark Wahlberg there. I have not seen it. It's based on a book about
A Vietnam era sniper or something but anyway, he takes this like guy who just teams up with them for the movie and he makes them the shooter like the the he teaches him how to shoot because that's the easy per
All that other stuff I talk about that's the part I'm looking for that's what I'm looking for in a sniper
You can shoot all day. I could put you on the range and you could shoot bulls eyes from 900 meters all day as long as you got your gatorade as long as you get your 10 minute break
As long as you get up and go pee pee
But what if I don't let you do any of that stuff
Then what oh is it sunny out on less too bad. Yeah, it's sunny out. Well, it's always it gonna rain. Yep. Don't get up
Your target might come up, but what if there's ants crawling and biting your eyes?
The eyes is problematic. I would it I would allow you to scratch the answer to your eyes, but but your target might come up while you're scratching
It
I wouldn't get up if I was you the
All the sniper courses definitely you talk about in the book you talk about stalking and that's something that no one I haven't seen that movie
But no one really understands the difficulty and the challenging and the self discipline
It's an exercise to self self discipline to crawl
You know one meter every 10 minutes it's hard to get to position where you can see your target take the shot because you have to yeah because you have to have the patience to and the mindset to like
I don't know if it made it into the book. I can't I know you should know your own book, but I
Remember as leopard crawling with a guy and we were on it wasn't even a sniper thing. It was just like a feel like a like a
Field craft thing so we were learning how to just stalk just as soldiers and we were we were side by side, but he was literally on an elevation
Maybe four inches higher than me
I remember I was looking at him and I was like, I just that's not a good spot to be yes
Freeze boom Walker came over God. I was it. I was in direct line of sight
But I was just that four inches lower. You got to like have the patience to look at the ground and go
I'm going to go this way even though it's out of your way because you can't be with insight of
Of the spotters or of the enemy and that guy went on to become
Our tier he joined our tier one unit. He's a he's a JTF guy
But I remember at that time it's so it's not like he was a dummy area and and and we're might have learned a value of the lesson. He probably learned a lesson, but but that's the
Mind said I'm looking for from day one from a guy that I'm going to put through sniper school because we don't we don't have a lot of numbers in Canada
You know like I was telling you at any given time there might be a hundred and fifty maybe a hundred and eighty
Snipers active at any time in the forces and that might and that you know if you add in our tier one tier two guys or maybe there's 200
So I don't have time to to go looking for the best guys, you know
You have to come you basically got to come to us and and so I'm looking for the patient
I'm looking for the guy who's going to take that extra five minutes and look at the ground
He's who's not going to when I tell him okay, you can go go start stalking who's going to sit there for another five ten minutes lose that time
But study the route on his map
You know because it's easy to start run and then you go oh man, I shouldn't know where I'm going and
No, no time spent on the map is time saved on the ground
Right and you so you're looking for that guy and there's just it's a it's probably the same with seals you just you don't it's hard to describe but you know it when you see it
So you get done with sniper school
You spend some more time and then
September 11 happens game on and
And the opportunity comes up
For you to go and deployment now you'd already been through sniper school you were a sniper, but the opportunity there's no opportunity for sniper deploy what they need is a driver
right which
A driver slash
Security yeah, which is which is I mean it's definitely a dangerous job. It's definitely a monotonous job. It's not it's not a glorious job by any stretch
But and also what's rough about being a drivers you have a lot less control over your own fate
I mean you're basically in a defensive situation when you're driving in a convoy you're in defensive situation. That's all that is to it
So here you are you get your target. Yeah, your target. You've been trained to be the hunter
And now you get an offer to go on deployment to be the hunted base as a driver and of course because your
A warrior you say oh, you need a driver. You don't need a sniper, but I'm going to go to Afghanistan
All right, bring it on. Yeah, that was it. It was stay home or be a driver
Pretty easy. So get this pretty simple. So now you were trying what were these little deep you drive it out this so it's
It's
What do you guys got that's comparable nothing? Um, do you just like a little land rover type vehicle? Yeah, but it's like not even like it's it's it's almost a class of its own is it
No, it's like a little
Dune buggy looking thing it had like a four cylinder engine build originally by Volkswagen
We they were roughly the same like look as a original willys Jeep
But that's where the similarities ended and you get to Afghanistan and you're you're drive where are you?
Kabul that was Kabul. And so you're driving people around the city. Yeah from base to wherever they got to go from the airport to our main base, which was
Was the name of that camp again
I'm sorry, I forget the main camp we had in Afghanistan, but it was between the King and Queen's palace got it and
Yeah, they'd go there or because it was
Officers and liaison officers mostly that we worked with right it so it'd be like goliies on with the Turkish guys goliies on with the Germans goliies on with this Afghan war lord
You'd sit around ways. Yeah, yeah, basically and we'd be as bodyguards when he was there and stuff and
And like we said there's a threat. You you obviously were prepared for anything of course, but you know, there wasn't a super high threat
Right, however
There's always a threat and I'm going to the book here
The eldest jeeps were not designed to withstand an attack
This fact became starkly apparent when three three RCR guys were driving to Eltis and hit a land mine
Two of them sergeant Robert short and corporal Rob Beer and Fenger died immediately
And the driver TJ Sterling a friend of mine survived though he was injured
After the incident TJ was brought to the hospital at camp warehouse
And me and another one of the guys from the regiment went to see him
This was the first time I'd seen one of our guys hit by a land mind
In fact, it was the first time I'd seen a casualty at all
TJ was pretty banged up a couple of teeth were broken and he may have had a broken draw
He had laceration's all over
There's always a particular odor in the hospitals around people of suffered traumatic injuries
I remember smelling that odor like blood or maybe just what I thought blood smelled like
TJ was on a stretcher with big wheels
We'd use this kind of stretcher before in training
To me it was a kind of prop
This thing we used for simulations
But this was not a simulation
This was the real thing
TJ was still in shock
It had taken a few hours for him to be extracted from the scene of the explosion
Shorty and beer and Fenger are gone he said
Yeah man, we replied, we heard
I need a smoke man, I need a smoke TJ said
The doctors and nurses wouldn't allow it but as soon as they were out of the vicinity
We lit a cigarette for TJ and gave him a couple of drags
That's way better thanks
We stayed in Chadwick, TJ about some
In consequential things trying to keep a fellow royal in a good state of mind
For me personally, I was learning from what was happening
Facing the reality that when things go wrong
You have to get that smell in your nostrils
And look those sights right in the eye
Sadly, a few years later, TJ ended up taking his own life
I was a Paul Barrett as funeral
And as I carried his coffin, I wondered if he carried guilt
For being the lone survivor in that incident
So really to me, that's like you're welcome to war
Yeah
And
When you talked about getting that smell in your nostrils
And looking those sights right in the eyes
That's how I think it's important for people to remember
You know when things are bad
Some people want to deny that it's happening
They want to hold their nose and shield their eyes from it
Wrong answer
Breathe it in
Yeah, and our gig, especially
You have to
That
You have
And our line of work, that's the norm
And I'll tell you, I haven't working with
Worked with a bunch of different companies and bunch of different industries
They run into these situations too
Where their company is going to fail or there's a problem
There's things go wrong
And no, you know what?
Lives are not at stake and I say this all the time
But livelihoods are
And if you're the CEO of a company, you're going to have to now lay off
500 people, 1000 people, 3 people
And now that person is not going to be able to afford their mortgage or pay for their kids
Or get food on the table
That is serious business
You're ruining someone's life
And if you want to shield your eyes at that moment
And you want to hold your nose so you don't have to smell it, you're wrong
Yeah
And obviously this too here for TJ
This is, you know, we're talking about the psychological wounds that people get
Yeah, which for him more worse than his physical wounds
Yeah
I remember one time after I got hit
Because he actually came back with us
And it was six on the tour I was wounded on
And he stayed in the talk the whole time
But I remember we were back and I was hit
And we were at his house and we're having a little bit of a party
And he was crying because he couldn't believe that he, because he got
He was wounded and he got a monthly stipend for his injuries
And he was still active doing and stuff
And when I wound it we had a new veterans system come in
Where I just got like a lump sum payment
And he was crying about how is it that he can get this money
But I only get this money and Joey, what happened to you is so much worse
And what happened to me and I was, why you worried about it
I'm okay man, I'm alive, we're here having some drinks
But he was so tore up inside about what happened to me
And he happened to me versus what happened to him, what happened to Shorty and Baron finger
And he just carried that
And you hear about that survivor's guilt thing
And you don't realize how real it is till you see it
And even after I got wounded when I came home
I felt like shit because my boys were still back there
And then when they went back in 2010
Because our unit rotated back into theater
It killed me, I was dying inside
Those are my guys, you know, they're over there without me
And I'm letting them down because I told them I was going back with them
I said don't worry guys, I'll get better I'll go back
And I had to like really come to grips with that
And you know, TJ couldn't
We lose too many guys that's to that stuff
But I've all, I don't know, I never had those thoughts
But I never thought of ending my own life ever
But I've known enough guys that have done it
That clearly it becomes an option to some people
And I'm at the point with it because it just happened
Maybe a month ago with a guy I worked with in the Green Braise
And I just don't think we can save them all
I don't know if any of you are guy, I mean I think I texted you when it happened
You did, you texted me
And I want to really, my wife, Alana, she's never seen me cry
And I cried that night for Johnny
And it was because we thought we had him
He was living at one of the guys, how he said was on the team that we worked with
He had a girlfriend and things were looking good
And you know, I've had to come to the conclusion
In my own mind that we're not going to save them all
And this is a side effect of the life we chose
That some of our comrades are going to go that direction
And if I was to dwell on it the way TJ did
Then I would become like TJ and I can't afford to do that
You know, use the word Dwell
And that's a word that I use as well
I use the word Dwell and I always say
That you got to face these things
You got to understand these things
You got to actually embrace these things
You got to bring them in but you can't to well on them
That's right
And I think that's the key
Is to, is honestly to do what you said
Is to breathe it in
So look it in the eye
Deal with it
Don't stay there
That's right, move on
Accept it as a consequence of the actions you've chosen
And move on to the next step
Otherwise, you'll be that guy
Talking about that high school football pass that you caught
It's an analogy that fits here
Because we talked about this in your car
There's some guys
I was a neighbor, I was a Navi seal, I was a paratrooper, I was a machine gunner
Whatever it is, I was a jitsu black belt, whatever it is
And that's where they're stuck
That's where they're dwelling there in purgatory
And that whatever ring of hell you want to call it
Stuck in that moment
And you got to move on
You can't dwell because that's where you're going to die when you dwell
It really simply
What you got to do
It's you got to just take a step
Got to take that step forward
You got to look, you got to look it in the eyes
Then you got to walk away
And you got to walk forward and move forward
And make some make go in another direction
Go forward
Yeah
Don't go backwards, go forward
And the other part is accept
That maybe you can't change things
You can't change what's happened in the past
You cannot do that
It happened
And you're not going to change it
So what are you going to do?
Are you going to let it drag you down?
Are you going to dwell on it forever?
Don't do that
I know it gets a hold of you
I know it's a tough one
But deal with it
Accept that you can't change it
Accept that you're here for a reason
To do something
You have the opportunity that maybe your buddies didn't get
They didn't get, never mind
You have an opportunity that your buddies did not get
You think they would want to have you kill yourself?
No, they'd want you to live
But that's what you need to do
Honor them
By living a awesome life every day
Make the change, be the difference
You can't change the world
But you could change somebody else's day
You can be the positive influence in your little tiny sphere
My influence in the world, yours, echoes
It's not the world
But it makes someone else happy
You can be the difference between a good day and a bad day for someone
When I decided that I was going to try and become an officer in the sealed teams
Part of that, part of my decision
I was going to be an admiral or whatever
And I said, you know what?
Because I had a prior and listed officer that was just made our lives
Awesome because he was such a great guy
I said to myself, you know what?
I might not change the world
But I'm going to have a cool sealed pool two in one day
Those guys are going to be fired up
And we're going to kick ass
Just my little world
Just that little thing
And no matter where you are, you got that little world
Maybe like you said, maybe it's one of the person
Maybe it's just yourself
But you make that little part of your world a little bit better
You wake up in the morning
I firmly believe you decide how that day is going to go
Absolutely
I missed my flight to come down
I should have been here yesterday, I missed my flight
I owned that
I had a bad morning
And I was, I think I was even on the phone with you
And I said, yeah, extreme ownership
My fault
And you giggled at me and you said, yep, own it, whatever
And then I might get my one assistant called me
And I said, you know what?
I'm done being pissed off
You know, because I can't, I'm not going to let this one thing ruin the rest of my day
And the rest of my weekend
How's that helping you move forward?
How's that helping the rest of your day?
How's that helping you get here right now?
Doesn't help anything
That doesn't mean that doesn't mean be a robot either though
No
Deal with it, process it
Don't get me wrong
I was really mad yesterday morning
And it takes a lot
He's waiting for you down here
Oh, well, I'm like, I've all the things to be laid for
Yeah, that's right, a guy like, you want a guy like Jocco to think you're a shit
You know, you're plug and can't make a timing
But
You know, everything's gonna be okay
I'm here, we're still doing the podcast
It's beautiful weather
I got to see my kids, I got to pick them up from school
Because I didn't think I was gonna
I got to, you know, I got to see some friends
Walk the dogs that day
But I made that decision myself though
I was sitting on the edge of the bed
I didn't have my prosthetically exon yet
And I said, okay, you're pissed off, now you're done
And I got up and I carried on with the day because
And I, okay, it's easy to say
What's easy for us to say
Take that step, don't dwell, move on
But I firmly believe if you decide
You can change your circumstance
That's a decision you have to make in your own mind
I firmly believe it
And it might not feel like it today
But try again tomorrow
And then try again the next day
And you know what call me
Before you make any decisions
Just please just call me first
If you have Jocco's number call him
Because the world is definitely better with you here
Than without you
And I hate to keep hammering this nail
But it's just a theme that I'm tired of here
A buddy of mine, another sniper had a heart attack
Not long after
That guy killed himself
He's a great dude, he's a legend in the Canadian sniper world
And he was diabetic and he smoked a thousand cigarettes a day
And drank a million beers a week
And they said the heart attack was so fast
He probably was because they found him in bed
He was crawling into bed and probably went
And it was dead before he just had even hit the pillow
That's how massive a heart attack it was
When I heard it was a heart attack, I was actually happy
Because when I heard it, I went
I just went shootin with him
He was in a great mood
Oh no no no no no no no it was a heart attack
And I went, oh thank God
That's the point of that
With that subject
So anyway
Let's move on man
It's talk about puppy dogs and rainbows
Okay, we're not there yet
No no no no no no
I was a good reference you know miss my flight good
I can bring my kids to school
You know all this good they can't run
So, I would like to go rainbows
But we're not there yet
All right brother, hit me
So now you're
You're coming back for Afghanistan
And you know you got your girlfriend and what not
And
Here we go
My first tour in Afghanistan ended a few weeks later
And I headed back home
I was still haunted
By all the things I had witnessed in Kabul
Images played over and over in my head
Whether it was small children begging for money
A mother holding a dead baby in the streets
Or my buddy TJ bloodied up from a roadside bombing
My girlfriend expected me to return as the same guy
Who had left six months earlier
When I was a different man now a different jodie
Everything around me looked different too
Maybe things hadn't changed much
But I felt like I was on an alien planet
My girlfriend had redecorated the house
Moving some of the furniture around and re-paining the bedroom
And I found it upset me
Life had gone on without me
And that fact was hard to take
People around me kept saying
What's wrong with you jodie? You've changed
And that would make me even more upset
Not because they were wrong
But because I thought I was the kind of soldier who could just walk it off
But few soldiers can
It takes time after a tour duty for a soldier to readjust a civilian life
And I wish I'd known that earlier
I was expected to continue life just as I had lived
It before my tour but I couldn't
Not right away
I couldn't step back into my normal routine
As if I hadn't witnessed anything on mission
I couldn't just hop in the car and go to the grocery shopping
Like everything was fine
It's interesting that you kind of felt like
You were weak sauce because you were not the exact same before you went on to point it
Yeah, you feel like I'm pussy
Even though you know you shouldn't feel like a pussy
You feel like a pussy
It's the most frustrating
At the time it was one of the most frustrating things
Because you want to be that guy for your for your for your woman
Of course, I'm still that awesome alpha male that you fell in love with
You couldn't whatever doesn't you know doesn't blink anything
Except that water bottle inside the road right there
What's that pile of garbage doing right there?
What do you mean I should just drive? Oh right. Yeah, this is our street. Sorry. It's not a road and cool
And and
Yeah, I just
I
Like I said I wish I'd had that advice that
You know be prepared for the fact because when I went to Kosovo
Because I've had that people ask me will you you didn't have that reaction when you came out from Kosovo
Why lived in the barracks?
All my shit was in storage. I didn't have a girlfriend. I had a girl that I was dating. She picked me up
When we got home, but like it's not like we were gonna get engaged or anything
And you know, I didn't have any real belongings
You know, I you know, I still lived at the unit. This was a house I had bought
You know, my girlfriend had moved in, you know, she was talking about kids and marriage
And we had dog. We had a dog
And I came home and I was like what happened to my house and what is going on and like
You know, what I told my dad when I went to Kosovo
You know, in the book I taught what my dad one of the three times I've seen him cry in my life
Was when I deployed to Kosovo for the first time and and I said hey man, don't worry about it six months
Hey, what's six months, right? It's like six haircuts, six six six mortgage payments
It's nothing, don't worry about it
And I come home and I couldn't even think that way myself
And you know, and I know I don't know if you felt like that after your first deployment
But this one was different because I guess I had a life to come home to beside besides the unit
I've always been very compartmentalized in the way I think
Right, sometimes probably to a detriment to
My family a little bit
But I've always been very far from the work come home. I'm not I'm not working anymore
So just stop thinking about that stuff
And it's it's usually pretty positive but the problem is that when you get to you realize your compartmentalizing your family out of the picture kind of which I would have a tendency to do so what
And I mean that's probably part of one of the things that but even even when you're a real young guy
Like how long have you been married?
I've been married for a long time
Okay, and and I've always been like that. Okay. I honestly it's wrong. I think but the seal teams was always the biggest priority in my life
And you know people will be like oh family first
That was not true for me and luckily my wife understood that and she didn't hold it against me right
She knew that someday she knew the seal team was wasn't gonna last forever
And all you guys in the military I'll tell you what the military does not last forever
Well the big green machine rolls on yeah, with or without you exactly and and the people that are there when you when you fall off
Those are ones you gotta worry about when you're still on yep
And so that's why I think I just was able to compartmentalize what you know away right and I would basically be almost a skits of front of this is a guy that works
And this is a guy that's at home. He's dad or whatever and boom. I just have that really good split and I think it was beneficial to me
It probably was probably is yeah, yeah, I guess I assumed I was that guy too because that's I you know I approached most things that way but
Maybe just having that little home of my own for that one tour and then also you know losing a couple buddies for the first time
Maybe I don't know I don't know what the thing like it's not like it didn't wreck anything like my career was fine like it was just well, I mean I lost a fiance out of it
But yeah, yeah, and that's what happens next so she announced this is back to the book here she announced that she was leaving
I was shocked because I didn't want to break things off. I just wanted to postpone the wedding
But for her this was all too much
Our relationship was over while I was certain this was the right time to get well, I wasn't certain this was the right time to get married
I was certain about one thing
I wanted to go back to Afghanistan in this time as a sniper
And that's something that
Yeah, I mean that's something that's hard to reconcile the feeling of
Just want to go back. I mean that's I want to go back right now. Yeah, of course
People, hey, yeah, what's it like you you asked me what's it like to be in politics? I go I'd rather be killing ISIS
Yeah, frankly, and I you know, I'm not ashamed to say it. I was good at it and and I love
The people that are out there doing it for us, you know, even though I'm not one of them anymore. You know what and
What we kind of skipped over but 9 11 happened during my sniper course and sniper course is we don't just have a rotation
I'm going on in Canada. We're very small military if you're on a sniper course
Holy shit like you've got you got there. They run like a one or two years something maybe
There's not even every year. No, well, they're now I think it is but back then
Mine was the first one in three years that had happened 25 of us tried out three of us passed
So it's not like you get on it and it's okay. You just got a pass
So but 9 11 happened on like day five or six or something and you know
As the towers fell we watched it fall on TV like they interrupted a class
We thought it was like a sesna right the guy comes so much as a little plane of the world trades in it
We're in the middle of a you don't interrupt a class
You know right you don't interrupt a training session
We're like okay man, thanks and the duty sergeant runs off
But we think a drunk guy in a sesna and then he comes back and then so we go down to watch at the duty station and
As it as the towers are falling. I'm hearing like the starting bell
Right, I'm hearing like the horn at the start of the super bull and I'm like oh, it's on because I was considering retiring because of the lack of action
So you did get your
I hate to call it a dream but you got your dream like I'm back to Afghanistan. Oh, yeah, and this time you're going as a sniper
Which is awesome you're back in Afghanistan and there's some heavy fighting going on now. There's some legit fighting and and
The Canadians are actually leading operations which is the first time in quite some time. I think since Korea
Yeah, well this this what what we what we were we this was the first time we'd let operations
That were non peacekeeping
Ever
Since Korea yeah, you're right and this but we what we walked into was the first offensive and NATO's history
Think about it right NATO has never been on the offensive except for enough Afghanistan kind of weird but North Atlantic treaty organization
But anyway, this one was called operation Medusa
This Canadian led up NATO operation was going to be different from anything we'd done so far
It was a bit of a wake-up call so was the fact that my buddy Jeff Walsh had been killed in friendly fire in an accident that happened in August
Clearly we were entering a high risk situation
That didn't determine any way in any way if anything it made my resolve stronger. I trained for this and I was ready
It's a good feeling
What what was the friendly fire was an aircraft or was it shooting?
No this one was unfortunately it was his buddy in the vehicle. They were sitting next to each other and
I guess
He got in with his rifle
Not paying attention to the muzzle
And it went off and shot Jeff through the face and killed him
That no one really knows exactly what happened but that's basically pretty much what everyone figures happened
Muzzle discipline
Never point your weapon it's something you do not want to destroy
Yeah, keep your finger off the trigger, keep your weapon on safe
All right, now as you guys are getting ready to go into this operation Medusa
One of the orders that comes out is if anybody gets hurt during this mission
We're going to stop right away and take care of it
And you're going to make sure the casualties are dealt with and then reassess the situation before moving forward
That was during the
The company commanders orders right and you were kind of thinking
Wait a second. Yeah, for those of you that don't know
Which is I'm sure people that aren't the military when you're going on in attack you're your ideas to maintain the momentum of the attack and you take casualties along the way while you're attacking
You keep attacking
Yeah, you don't stop you know you're going to take casualties. You're going to keep people going to get hit things are going to slow you down
You don't slow down. You try and keep pushing forward. Keep pushing forward
I've said it on this podcast before aggression will mitigate risk
So you get aggressive you move through the target you get the target secure and then you can deal with the guys that are down
Yeah, not that you're going to
Ignore them and you can't drop off a medic here and there to handle a situation
But you're not going to stop. I mean literally you know stop
No, you can't stop the whole battle group you can't stop
But you know though I don't know if the order was delivered the way it was intended
But that's how it that's basically what that's to paraphrase what was said
Yeah, and that's why you know a couple of us were just kind of like yeah, and what's really what's really
To your point of you're not sure if that's what was meant what's really important is that the main thing you want to get across to your troops
When you're going on to assault is you want the main point to be get aggressive
That's the main point that you want to get across to them not hey the main point that you're going to take away from this is if we take casually stop
You know
We're going to get aggressive. We're going to finish through the target. We're going to secure the target and nothing is going to stop us from doing that
I don't care what happens. That's what you want to have going into it. Right. That's that's my that was always my impression
I've never been a company commander though, but you've received plenty of orders. Yes, sir. All right
Now
We're starting it on the assault the assault is going down
And here we go up ahead the first vehicles were closing in on the white schoolhouse
The Zettelmired cleared away for the lead between comprising of four lat LAVs and a G wagon to take position next to the schoolhouse
It was at this point that the Taliban decided to make their presence known by firing an anti tank
Recorulus rifle round at the softest vehicle of this lead platoon the G wagon
The round went right through the front windshield causing immediate casualties
Next our whole soul opened up all at once every can and every coaxial machine gun was firing
Taliban were coming out of the weeds all around us out of tunnels windows mouse holes
They had their head and they had to held their powder to the last second
And then it was game on they had the defenders advantage and they used it
The call went out on the radio that one of our vehicles was hit and we had casualties
As this was happening one of the LAVs that was stuck next to the schoolhouse went nose first into a ditch and was stuck
I was trying to listen on the radio when suddenly the troops who were sticking out of the top hatches of our LAV yelled
Holy fuck they're right there. They let go of burst from their C7s followed by grenade from a rifle mounted grenade launcher
At that moment our artillery began raining down and air support started dropping bombs on the Taliban
I felt helpless during all this chaos because the plan for us as snipers was to get involved only one subjective rugby had been achieved
At that point we would get up on the schools roof and provide cover for the bound to the next objective
But in this situation Barry cash those are your sniper teammates Barry cash and I were stuck inside the LAV right at the time
When our shooting skills were needed up top needed most up top
I was working the radio doing my best to keep everyone in the vehicle informed of what was happening up ahead
Okay, we've got three wounded in action and one killed in action
I said relaying the message that there were three wounded soldiers and one who was killed in the G-wagon that had been hit
Every soldier had a zap number which would be used as an identifier in case you were wounded or killed in the field
Standard operating procedure was that if someone died in combat you never revealed their name during the battle
At this point we didn't know which soldier had been killed in that attack on the G-wagon
And no one seemed to know the zap number either
Finally the major got on the radio I need to know now who the fuck just got killed
The radio crackled and a voice came on
It was worn off Sir Rick Nolan sir Rick Nolan was the soldier I had had a brief argument with the day before
I've always felt bad that our last conversation was a little strained
Rick was a good man and a great soldier sitting in the front seat of that G-wagon
He had no chance of surviving a direct rocket hit
I looked at Barry and Cash we were all stunned in the silence
No matter how much you prepare for that moment when a soldier you know becomes a casualty
There's nothing that compares to the actual feeling
On top of that it was jarring for all of us because we just didn't expect a soldier with his level of experience
And status to be the first one taking out on the mission
That section right there
Reminding me we were I had guys out
They were clearing the sector of Ramadi
And big gunfight broke out and I don't know three or four hundred meters away
Maybe five hundred meters away whatever it was
I can just hear gunfire mayhem
Radeos I got up to a rooftop and I'm
You know hey what's up and I hear the the element commander got on the radio
And he says hey we're in a cash lead evacuation we got one killed and one wounded
And
They were with I don't know probably twenty Iraqi soldiers and five or six seals
But you don't know who it is right and some waiting
And you don't want to say anything on the radio and I'm waiting and I and
Finally I just said is it I rack your American is like the longest
Pause I've ever heard of my life and he comes back and he says both Iraqi and he was like they know
Faced the Iraqi but to the Iraqi soldiers but you know I was
Relieved very relieved at that point and you talk about that too and hear how
Somebody gets hurt or somebody gets wounded or somebody gets killed and you you know it's one of your guys
And you feel guilty when you hear the name and it's not whatever one of your what are your better friends or whatever
And that's one of those strange and freaking horrible things about war yeah
You guys were I
Mean this was like a shit sandwich out of the gate yeah
Yeah, it you got to remember this is the first time Canada's been on the offensive since Korea and
Doesn't matter how much you train
The first few minutes are going to be sloppy until you get your shit together
Well, I shouldn't have even said shit same which I should have said this is combat that's it because I mean it's going
It's going to you going to there you're setting up your positions you're moving into position
The enemy hadn't really revealed himself as you said in the book they held their powder
Yeah, well, we we wondered if they were there at all because the day before
We watched as they all drove out of the area fighting aged guys
Just drove away in trucks trucks full they left some guys behind they actually
You know the average Taliban guy, you know, you don't even have the duck if you shoot now. You're really I mean you should duck but the point is he's probably not going to hit you, but they whoever they left behind
Were guys that knew what the wood knew what they were out knew what they were doing and I give them credit for that like
You know they're not soldiers as we consider it, but they're tough guys
You know and you guys you sniper team you guys didn't even have your body armor. Yeah, well, because it's because it's part of the you know
What's the three rules of special ops, right? Always look cool always know who you are and if you don't know where you are make sure you look cool
Right, so wearing ball caps and not having body armor makes you look cool, but also in our minds and we trained
We have enough shit to dump you know why add body armor to it and and helmets, you know, we're going to be in a position. We shouldn't if we're being engaged we fucked up
But I tell you we I don't know if you're going to read it, but there's a there's a few moment few minutes later, I'm like I really wish I had some body armor
Oh no, I'm not going to read it, but I asked why I brought it up and I was actually I was actually not going to bring it up
But then I circled to bring it up, you know why because there's somebody out there that's in the field right now that's going on some operation and they're thinking you know what I probably better off if I didn't bring my body armor and I'm going to tell you
Bring your body armor, yeah, bring your body armor. I did want the operation that for a bunch of reasons
I decided that I didn't need body armor, right, and of course ended up in a bad scenario and the only thing I'm thinking as I have as I'm have a gun pointed out my chest is
You're an idiot. Yeah, and you don't have body armor on. We had we had the strike plate. Oh, front of our chest rig, but we found out after
If we'd ever been struck in that plate, the spall from the plate would have killed us because it's designed to be inside the body armor, the the Kevler
Because it had a Kevler wrap around it around the around the ceramic turns out it's not
That wrap is there more just for aesthetics or something. I don't know but anyway, so it's like oh, no, no, it has to be inside the issued vest in order for it to work a pocket in your chest rig
Yeah, no, that's not the other crazy thing again for guys that are overseas right now even if you think you're going to be far enough away from a
Firefight if you could hit with an ID you want your body armor on 100% 100% I always wear my body armor in a vehicle. Yeah after this but
But even the night I was hit I didn't have body armor on yeah, I don't always just a weird thing for me, but
You know, they're the Romans and Irna the Greeks the Romans they called it, you know, the first time you see combat, you know, see in the elephant
So you know, we, so let's go back to Rick so Rick is a war officer, so do you guys maybe a pedi officer chief pedi officer
Roughly he's like a company he was a company quartermaster, so he's not sergeant major, but he's like the next NCO down
I'm going to guess he had about 18 20 years he would he had been a recon guy most of it, you know, I trained under him mentor to under him you know, it's like
When you when you imagine casualties you're imagining private Smith and Corporal Jones and you know whoever
But our first guy killed is a guy who trained his whole life for war, and he's the first guy gone
You know, like there's no there's no status there's no seniority in combat. No it doesn't care if you've trained every day for 100 years or if you've trained one day forever
That bullet is if it's got your name on it's got your name on it
I was going to say bullets don't even have names on them. Yeah, they're going to hit yeah, and that's why combat is so that's one of the things about combat that makes it so
So damn awful is like you said you can train as hard as you can train you can make no mistakes
You can be the perfect warrior on the perfect mission and you can still get blown up. You can still get shot. There's nothing you can do about it
Yeah, I mean I hate to say there's nothing you can do about it. You're getting in you're going to be trading lead with other people and
That bullet can hit you and even if there are if they are dirt farmers with with 30 year old AKs if it's functioning. It's a threat and you know
I've had chats with guys about why was why was that vehicle even on the objective?
When you had these perfectly good armored vehicles now these are up armored jeeps the these these the gee it's there. They're the German one right
We'd only train to this point right and and in training that vehicle went to the objective
So why wouldn't it? You know until until someone puts a recoil is rifle round through it and you go
Might be best to leave that one behind and maybe just get another lab for the for the company quartermaster which after that they did
But you know some lessons have to be learned
But so the mayhem continues
You end up helping
Collect the casualties yeah
And now you're sitting there you're at them when we would call a casually collection point. Do you use that term?
Yeah, I don't know if you use that in here. CCP. So you're at the CCP the casualty collection point and here you go
One of the most important things in the field of battle is taking care of your dead in fact the creative of the royals is never leave a royal behind
On the field you want to get the bodies out of sight as quickly as possible. It's demoralizing for a soldier to witness a dead comrade during battle, especially when it's someone of Rick stature
I went in the back of an LAV grabbed a couple of body bags and got to work with some of our other guys
We picked up Rick and zipped him into a bag
One of the other fallen officers was Frank Mellish
For a second I had a bit of hope because he was on a stretcher which meant he might have only been wounded
But once I saw soldiers approach and check his dog tags
I knew he was gone a casualty of the round that took out the zettle mire
The sad twist was that Frank Mellish and Rick know it had been friends for their whole careers and now they were lying on the ground together
Next I help put private William Cushley into a bag
I'll never forget looking directly into his still open eyes and saying sorry bro
As I zipped up his body bag
Now that's obviously enough to crush
Some people mentally and emotionally at that point
But soldiers don't have time
They have to do their jobs
What?
As you went through that emotion
And then you turn around and you go, okay?
What's next?
Yep
How's that work?
That's what you do
If I had spent more than that when second say in sorry bro, what am I missing?
I was doing, I couldn't get my snipers into a position to be useful
Being snipers so we were being useful in other ways
And once that problem was dealt with because you could see the guy, like you know we were trying to reorganize ourselves here
And the re-org phase
The guys are going the long way around of the vehicle because they were lined up next to the vehicle
And so me and a couple of guys are like, okay, we got to fix this
We fixed it and people you felt, you felt people relaxed
And then my main concern was that's still our objective
And we got to get to it so what's next?
And that's when I went looking for like I'm not even sure who's in charge at this point
Because we had taken so much of our leadership
It'd been hurt the company's sergeant major to the warrants
You know, when that Zettelmeyer got hit, you know, it wounded a bunch of guys
And you know we had Afghans with us, we had some Americans with us
What do you call the National Guard?
I think the National Guard mentors for the Afghans are with us
And my biggest disappointment from that day
And I know I'm going to catch some, I might catch some shit from some guys that were there
We didn't take our objective
To this day
You know what, 2016, you know, it's just 10 years later
Almost, it's a 10 or a little bit 10 years
And to this day, I'm like, we didn't take our objective
Yeah
In part of that, you know, and for one thing, when I, when I, you know, was reading that
And I mean obviously it's just emotional moment
And I knew that you just had to detach from the emotion
And I used that term all the time
Yeah, you got to just detach from it
And you got to be conscious of that
So like, folks that are listening
That are thinking how do you do that? That's how you do it
But you cannot, you've got, when you feel the emotion starting to override
Your logic and your ability to do your duty
That's what you have to do, you have to go, okay
I got to detach from those emotions and I got to do my job now
Yeah
In that moment, like, I actually don't remember
Like I didn't really have any feelings
You know, I get more feeling now out of it
Listening to you read it
Yeah
Because that
Starting with, especially when TJ got, got hurt, you know
That's our workspace
Yeah
Like, you know, here we're in an office
Yeah, you can, people typing, doors opening, closing
That's the normal sound and vibe of this workspace
We had burning vehicles, we had dead soldiers, we had wounded soldiers, we had about 15 wounded by this point
We had air support raining in, we had artillery support raining in, we had enemy mortars coming down
And you know, that's the norm
They don't like, when you sign up to be a Navy seal, they don't hide the fact that you might get gunfights
It's like the first thing you read, it's in big, bold black letters
You're gonna, you could get killed
It's not in the small print at the bottom of the contract, you know, claws, B of Section 4
It's right there
That's what you signed up for
So
It's not abnormal for these things to be happening
What you have to do is accept that they happened and carry on with the job
And in that moment, I remember, I said, sorry bro, because I was, I was, I was actually probably felt more like, hey man, sorry you're out of the game
Because it's gonna get exciting from here
You know, I, oh, a fallen soldier in combat to me is, especially a volunteer
We weren't drafted, did anyone make you join the Navy?
No
I, I fought with my parents to get into the Army
I, I would have, I would have, fist, I would have fought ten of my best friends to get that job as that sniper team leader
And there is nowhere else I wanted to be and if soldier falling in combat doing the job he chose and a, and a play
It's not of our choosing
Don't ever feel sorry for me, because I went to Afghanistan, believe me, I wanted to be there
And for, and to fall
I get in a lot of shit by some people, but that's, it's one of the greatest things a soldier can do
Is the fall for it with his friends doing the job that he chose or she chose
And it's, I, I get in shit sometime because I think like this
Well, it's, I think the reason that is is because it's so hard for people that
Don't know what that brotherhood is like
They don't know what it's like to want to do that
They don't understand that that's
That's the soldier in the child, that's the way you've wanted to be your whole life
That's the way I want to be my whole life so to, for these things to happen is
It's like feeling bad for an MMA fighter because they got punched in the face
There you go for it
You signed up for it and those guys, you know, they're there to fight
And the military, you're there to fight and a byproduct of fighting in this situation
Can be injury, it can be death
And like you said, it's what we all signed up for
And you know, going back to the situation here
One of the things that you talked about the fact that you guys didn't secure your objective
And one of the reasons that you didn't secure your objective the next day
is because you had another friendly fire incident
And this is awful and you know, the book that I wrote with
Dave starts off with a friendly fire scenario happening
And I wish I could explain to civilians
It's really hard for people to understand how these things happened
I mean we've already talked about it
What two times in this book here's another one
ATEN's come in
You're basically like half awake trying to get trying to get a little bit of sleep
Yeah
And all of a sudden you know you hear the gun fire, you hear things happening
All of a sudden you hear an ATEN burst go
And cash, you're your teammate cash
He's like, you're not going to believe this
But I think he just strafed our own guys
Strafed is when you fire machine gun can
And fire fire from an aircraft
And sure enough 30 soldiers more than 30 soldiers were injured
Yeah
And one was killed and by the way the one that was killed was private mark
Graham who was a Olympic spreader for Canada 1992 and Barcelona
Yeah
I mean it's a nightmare
It was a nightmare
It was
Such a I even got mad at cash at first
Because I was like because I heard it and you know that breath
It's actually a nice feeling
And till that happens
And that one sounded weird
Because I got his half awake
And they were doing strafing runs across
Because we were on each side of the Argonne Dobrever
So there's a bit of distance
And that one was like that was real close
That's kind of weird and I'm trying to just wake up
And cash is yeah they hit the hit us
I go what the what are you talking about
Why would he and I look down from our sniper position
To where the vehicles were and that's what exactly what it happened
And on my mind I know what an A10 strike does
I'm like oh my god he killed all my friends
And then through the dust and so right away
I'm like okay well if I'm the enemy I know what I would do
You know sound the bugles boys were attacking
They didn't do that
My theory is they had already left after the gun fight the day before
And so we reorientate all our focus to the front
To keep an eye on the enemy and I can't help but look down
We had a JTF sniper team directly to our left
And they left their spotters in place
And they rest on the rest of them ran down with their medical kids
And when they were walking away
Eventually the team you know four guys walk away with a body bag
And I'm like oh okay that's it
And then the you know the radio
You know then that's like yeah we're 10 10 wounded
Okay to 12 okay 17 is 21
And then I think we ended up at about 34 35
So the entire leadership of the company's wiped out
And with injury
And that's it that company is now combat and effect
Yeah, which is
I mean to hear that in the modern day
You don't hear that very often combat and effect
I mean that they can no longer perform their duties
Yeah, they just don't hear that
They just don't have enough bodies left
Like they just didn't have enough soldiers that were still functioning
And you know we went to Afghanistan in 2002
With op was an anaconda I believe
We sent a battalion of Canadian soldiers with and that's where the Canadian snipers set the new record
Beatying Carlos half cocks that had stood since Vietnam
But part of that mission was we lost four guys to an American F-16
And then this happened and people give a lot of shit to the American Air Force or aircraft
Mistakes happen
We almost got lit up by our own guys at the beginning of the assault
You know we didn't talk about it
But I had to radio and remind them hey guys we're coming in from your flank
You've looked through thermal I've looked through thermal
The guys like us look anything like bad guys looking in through thermal
I don't know how it happens
Yeah, but guys get so amped up and they're so ready to kill something
You just don't want it to be you
Hey in Ramadi there was incidents where
Humvees engaged other humvees
Right?
Because the enemy has no more
Does he look like anything like a humvee
No more distinct event in the world in a humvee
Yeah, especially when you're in the military
And but that's to your point that's the level of confusion and mayhem and chaos that happens
And just the mentality of guys when they're scared and all of a sudden they see muzzle flash
And okay, you know what boom oh I see something over there engaged
Everything looks like a shovel and someone's hand looks like an AK
So I don't lay any blame on the American pilot that did this
He was doing the job he was there to do and someone told him to do something
And they he cut off the wrong puff of smoke and that's what happened
You know it was just a literally it was one of those
It was one of those each little action led to it
Right, you know from mark lighting the garbage fire
To to him coming over the mountain and the and the sun is in his eyes
Amen
Shit happened a bunch of small mistakes that compound
And I even mistakes just just such situational actions
Yeah, that compound and two a tragic situation
But I when you consider what a strafing run from an eight ten can do
For us to only have one killed is amazing is incredible
And and and only you know of those thirty something wounded
I might not have the right number
But if I understand correctly
Maybe it doesn't have to retire due to their injuries
Maybe
Crazy
Yeah
So you guys continue doing sniper operations
You guys continue
Going on missions you support SF you support others
Lots of really solid missions and now you're out on another operation
You're patrolling through a village
And again it's your team that you've been with the whole time
You're following cash your boy cash
And I'm going to go to the book here
Once he was about ten meters ahead
I turned and took my first step forward
My right foot touched the ground
And a massive orange fireball soared across my face
I didn't hear a sound
For a few seconds I felt waitless as if I was suspended in space
The next thing I knew I was on the ground
My ears nose and mouth tasted like mud
And that's when the pain hit
A pain so intense that it completely overwhelmed my body and my silence
I started punching the ground and screaming
Oh my god, oh my god it was the only time in my life
I've ever uttered anything religious
The blast was so powerful that he had knocked cash down
And I saw him in the dirt up ahead of me
For a few seconds I couldn't see barrier guard
They had probably done what good snipers are supposed to do upon hearing the explosion
Run for cover and prepare for an ambush
A few seconds later once they realized what had happened
They came running back towards me
So there it is
Did you know what did you know was an ID?
Not why
Could have been RPG, could have been someone there for those of you that don't know
You don't know big booms are going off
I didn't hear anything
Right like I said like
You're not going to hear the one that gets you from in my case it was real
But my hearing was fine, there's no ringing
There is no and I've read Colonel
Help me out he wrote it on killing
Oh yeah, yeah
Yeah
Anyway, so I know your name I just forget it right now
And he talks about that in his other book on combat
Yeah, the little audible
The body will shut it off
And it's split second
But anyway
I knew I'd done something
Something bad it happened
Once I you know my weapon was gone, you know my night vision is gone
Right
And the pain was so bad
And you know it technically was an ID though
Under the technical definition right because it was a
An any personal landmine on top of a mortar bottle
Technically
We you and I know that's an ID
But it's really two conventional munitions put together
And it did exactly what it was supposed to do
You know
It just it's one of those
It's one of those things of war where there's no rhyme or reason about who's going to get wet or when or where
Because everyone else in your patrol just walked over it
I was last guy
I remember the first time I was ever shot
I was in homebees and I'm going over a bridge and back dad
And again this is going back to what you were talking about
Like when you don't really know what's combat's like
And I'm looking up ahead of me at the home via
And I see these like someone's throwing cigarettes
Out the window
I go
Who the hell is smoking
We don't even have any smoke
Like who's smoking right and how are they smoking at thousands of cigarettes
I think they're smoking so many cigarettes right now
And then why are they smoke
Who why are these things sparking when they hit the the ground over there
And why is there sparks
Oh
Okay
Newsflas
We're getting shot
We're under effective fire
Yeah
And it's one of those things
But my point is that you don't always know what's happening
And you know in the urban environment
You didn't know where shots were coming for you
You're like rounds to be going overhead
You could not tell where they were coming from
You know if they're hitting something you can kind of get a general idea
But you don't always know what's happening
And all right so now going back to the book here
My mates were all around me now
The next hour was the longest of my life
I was an absolute aggrst agony
And trying hard to stay positive
I was also trying hard not to think about the possibility
Of bleeding out
With each passing minute I was going weaker and weaker
Every time I closed my eyes it was harder to open them again
I knew that if I lost consciousness
It was over
Baring gold we're standing over me
Do you think I'm going to make it
I asked Gord
Of course you're going to make it
Never give up bro
You know that
And you guys hadn't been to T-Triple C
None of us
So for those of you don't know there's something called T-Triple C
Tactical combat casualty care
It's a very short course
That's like maybe a week
It's two days maybe three days
Because all the T-TU is how to keep somebody alive
When this stuff happens
That's what the goal is
And it doesn't take a super amount of knowledge
It takes some concepts
Number one stop the bleeding
But none of your guys had been to it
But they still saved your life
I mean between Barry Gord and I
You know like we're all experienced operate
And we still have enough first aid training
You know the first thing they did is slap the Ternic it's on
There you go
At the arteries and my thighs
And then they did their best from there
And we're snipers
We're not medics
And we don't bring as awesome as medics are
They're kind of in the way
When you're on a sneaky sneaky mission
That was what we
That's how we classified our missions
If they were sneaky sneaky
Or it's really sneaky sneaky
If we're really sneaky sneaky
What's almost going to have bad day
And this one was a middle sneaky and we were in a spot
Where there is no Aussie
You're not getting a vehicle in there
You know and the closest medic was
12, 1500 meters away on foot
At night through an Afghan village
Hours
Took him an hour
The wrecky platoon
Just thrown on this out there
They just gave
They just didn't even wait for it
They were just coming
I love those guys
That's why that's why
You I had to say
I love those guys
I everyone of them that listens
100%
I do anything for them
So
They get you
They do get you out
Yep
They
They put the phone in your hand
Before you go into surgery
Right
So we're back in Canada
I heard at the hospital and someone hands me a phone
And
I forget how it even went
Like I was on a lot of drugs by this point
One thing about getting wounded is
Get to a lot of good drugs
Here's what you told you dad
They got me dad
The towel band
But I'm alive
Going into surgery
I'm going to get through this
Don't worry
I can't
I kind of want to compliment you right now
Because you always hear
Of and of
Do you speak compliment
Like all my buddies
Anybody that knows
They got wounded
They're like hey don't worry about it
I would be okay
Yeah
And
At the same time
You called your dad like dad of wound
You don't go to the surgery
Don't worry about it
Yeah
You know
That's probably actually
What's funny is a mic monster
Who is one of my guys got killed in
Ramadi and
I mean they were in
Grueling
Sustained
Combat every single day
Firefights
I mean he went winchester
On his
On his heavy machine gun
So many times that I don't even know
Like one time
I was went to visit him
In their camp
Because I was on the other side
Winchester means completely at a ammo
Oh yeah
Sorry
Winchester means you're out of ammo
So I went to see
I went to his camp
Pretty early in deployment
Maybe
Three or four weeks in deployment
And I went over to their camp
To see how things were going
And
Someone's like
Oh go check out the video
That mic he made
And I go
Okay cool
And mic he shows me this video
And it's like a firefight happening
Yeah
And he's filming and he's putting
Stick in the camera
Up above the wall
And then he turns it back on himself
And he says
The name of the part of town that they were fighting
And was called the Malab district
And mic he forwards the camera
And himself
And he goes
It's the Moulin
And so
I'm looking at him laughing
And then you know me being Mr.
Professional
And I go
Hey man
And he's a new guy
And I'm you know
Jockel you know
And so I go
Hey man
I'm filming
When there's a firefight going on
I go you need to get your gun up
I don't want to see this again
And he's like
Hey sorry sir
But I was Winchester
I go
All right man
Film some videos
That's all you got left
Be the Hister
Be the document guy
And just like in my opinion
To go Winchester
For a seal
If he's anything like
Like arm machine gunners
That's pretty tough to do
Oh yeah
So
It's not like mic he wasn't carrying a tone around
Yeah
Like I said
My point of telling this story
Was that
You know this was happening on a
You know fairly regular basis
Definitely firefight
He wasn't going Winchester all the time
But he didn't know
But I'm just saying like
Well times
And he was in
You know
Almost daily firefighters
I remember that
For to this is an actual number
So
The first 24 operations that that
Element went on
In a row
They got to a firefight
In the city
Yeah
And then they had one
Where they didn't and then they went right back to it again
So they were getting a lot of firefights
And in a lot of danger
And
When we got home
When I got home
And I got to know his family
A little bit
His family was saying that when he'd call
They'd be like
What are you doing over there
And he'd say
Oh we're just training
Some Iraqi soldiers
Yeah
We're just on base
Just you know
Don't worry about anything
It's just fine
Typical combat soldiers
Fitting stories
To the family
Typical badass
Yeah
So that reminds me of you
Don't worry about it
You just got blown up
Yeah
Then
Here we go
I woke up with a doctor
Looming over me
Took a few moments
For the anesthetics to wear off
And for me to remember
Where I was and what was going on
Then it came back to me
In a rush
The mission
The landmine, the pain, the surgery
The surgeon standing
By my bed
Put it to me bluntly
I had to cut off both your feet
Boom
I believe earlier
We were talking about
Irreversible situations
Yep
And here you were
Was that real to you at that time?
Yeah
Or would you basically
Hey
I'm happy I'm alive
Like I got a seal buddy
That got blown up
Yeah
And
And actually didn't get blown up
You got shot
And
Anyways
One of my buddies was talking to him
And he's like a bro
And
I'm really sorry about
You know
Because he lost his leg
He was wrong
He was sorry about your leg
You know
And he goes
Fuck my leg
I'm happy to be alive
And
I got to be honest
I didn't think that
Yeah
Um
Soul drink is done on your feet
And I immediately went
Into defensive
Mode
I
Half my brain said
You tell that
Fucking guy to go back
And get that
One of the feet
And put it back
And the other half is saying
He's a pro
He knows what he's doing
If he took
Because we knew one was gone
On the scene
That was the one that detonated
The device
The landmine did exactly what it was supposed to do
It blew my foot off
The mortar bomb shredded
My other foot
And on the scene
I remember as I was
Getting put onto the structure
And getting put onto the ambulance
That was finally able to get to us
Because they literally
Plowed a road to me with a combat bulldozer
And had the ambulance behind it
Um
The medic
From Recky Platoon said
Hey man, your left foot
We got it back into place
Looks like it might be okay
So
But your right foot's gone
I'm like, okay
Whatever
Again at this point I'm like
So out of it
So when I woke up
And he says
Yeah
You know I had to take both feet
Huh?
Hmm
And in my mind
I'm thinking like, well
How am I going to
How am I going to do this job?
Okay
And then so then I go
And depending on who's
Manual you're reading
Or which doctor wrote it
There's certain number of steps
To grieving
And they say losing a part
A body part is like
Losing a family member or something
So now I'm dealing with two deaths
And the family
And the first step is always denial
And you know
And I'm like, ah well
It's 2007
You know how awesome
You know guys are going to be jealous
I had my legs blown off
I'm going to be like
Rob I'm going to be like
Astroboy
Be flying around
And shit
I'll have like Robo Coplegs or something
It's cool
It's 2007
Right? Everything's digital
Um
And I kind of
Whether it was the drugs
And or the endorphins
From going through all that
First
Until I was out of
Candahar that was my attitude
You know right up to the boys all came in
To see me off because we went from
So I think I spent another day in Candahar
They flew me to Bagrum
And then I flew to Kuwait
And then from Kuwait
On to
Germany
Yeah but
Lange to Longstool
And so every stop that we picked up
Moved American
Serviceman
And I think there was one other Canadian
But
So
I just
You know that's how I felt
Right?
And then once I was in Germany
Um
I was just trying to deal with every day by day
You know
I just was
You know they put me in a room with another guy
Who had been hit in an IED strike on a
So a lab you were saying L.A.
V. earlier so those are the
Marine Corps has an act of some L.A. V.
So that's why I was calling it that.
Yeah so it's lighter armored vehicle
And you guys in the army here they're called
Strikers
Except
R is have turrets and I think yours has like
Remote 50 cows or something
They're all made in London Ontario
Candahar by the way
Um
So
Yeah I was just trying to deal with each day
As it can't because now I'm
I've never there's no training for this
Right?
And casual decimulation
It stops once you're declared dead
Or evacuated right?
So now I'm in a stage where I'm like
Okay I'm in a room with another Canadian dude
Um
And American army hospital
And
I don't know
What's next?
And every time I look down
There's no toes to wiggle
It was just so I'm like okay
Well I'm just going to try and deal with this
Just deal with it
And I was in that mode for weeks
Yeah
I'm waiting
I think I was waiting for a point
Where someone was going to give me my diagnosis
You know or my
The conclusion
Or like a prescription like okay here's what you're going to do now
This is what not just with your legs but with your life
Yeah this is what's going to happen
You're going to do this you're going to follow these steps
And at the end you'll be deploying back to Afghanistan
Which is how it was going to my mind
You know I don't know what you're going to read next
But I was convinced
I'm going to back out guys
That's it like
That's it
Whenever you know the Navy or the Army wants to know something they send you on course
So you know I was on snab or course and then you go on
You go on driver course you go on
Tactically carry course, teach triple C
So as you're saying this that's actually the next portion
Yeah
That I was going to really good
Okay
Here you go exactly what you were just about to get into
From that point on I made it my mission to learn to walk again
I treated rehab like a military course
When the military wants a soldier to learn something
They send him on a course so as the approach I took with my rehab
The mission mindset right there
But at the same time
And now we start going into the fact that it was obvious that the military system
The military system just couldn't quite cope with my needs
Sure I was offered help with all sorts of things from rehab to finding a home
But no one truly understood the needs that are particular to a returning soldier
And neither did I
No
So you didn't even know I mean how do you know that but that's what I'm saying how can you know there's no course for that
There's no course there's no course there's no training
You know and and our military medical system was
Like like the
We have lots of medics we have doctors for things like spring dangles and
And you know you hurt your back on a rock march whatever whatever
Lots of guys and girls to do that
No you know our physiotherapists we got physiotherapists
But they've been dealing with tennis elbow and spring dangles for 40 years
And let's know
Detachment to them
It's not their fault
It's
They just that's the military that they were in
And you compare that in the book you talk about when you went to the Center for a trip in San Antonio
And now you had the American system which has been
Unfortunately
Dealing with
Thousands and thousands and thousands
Yeah of wounded soldiers
For at that point I guess for you guys about four five years
Okay four five years
Well it was oh well oh seven yeah
And I guess you guys started in 01 right after that
Yep
I don't whoever whenever the guys first went in after the towers dropped
And so they had experience and they have giant amount of money
I mean this is America and we do have a lot of money and they put a lot of money into it
And and at the same time you had some Canadian folks that were like
We don't need that kind of stuff
You don't need those kind of things for rehab
Right right well again I'm you know we have
I'm trying to think of a correlation here
But anyway we had these physiotherapists it's a trade in the military
You're your military physiotherapist and your job is to rehab guys like me
And I'm telling you you can't do it or you I'm telling you that you're failing
And this is why so your reaction is going to be well I know I do my job
And I don't so I don't at the time I was furious
In retrospect
They didn't know any better
And that's why I started advocating so hard
I got because I got home
And I said this is what we got to do
There's not that many guys like me coming home
I mean yeah there's a lot more than there were last year because we're actually at war
The center for the intrepid Walter Reed and I believe there's one here the naval medical
Is that yeah
Medical center bubble and there's Bethesda as well so
Well I've heard of three
San Antonio Walter Reed and the one here
Those are the biggies yeah those are the ones where most of the traumatic injuries have been going from from from you guys
So I said
Let's start sending a pair of physiotherapists down with like for every physiotherapist we send down or for every two casualties
We send down
Let's send down one of our physiotherapists and in six months
That physiotherapist will get more experience dealing with more injuries at
With more patients and they could ever hope for on base pedoawa
Where tuber gate is because we're talking the difference between a couple of dozen soldiers getting hurt playing rugby
Or whatever or ruck marching versus
Actually, yeah like a parade of guys getting smashed and IED strikes and air you know whatever was happening
You know I was standing there in the guy who ran Antonio at the San Antonio at the time was
He was in green beret
Fidio therapist so I don't know if he was one and then the other or how it worked
But so he's the lead physiotherapist and I remember this Marine walked into the room
And he had both legs gone above the knee so he's on the taller leg prosthetics
And he was blinded by it because he had been burned or whatever
And this guy he's in full uniform he like screams the guy's name he's like goons and he tackles him
And they start wrestling and I'm like yeah I want that because the hospital I was in
And again no offense to the hospital I got great medical care
For the standard
To their capabilities
And it it's not like it was bad but it wasn't what would have been best for me
Me being a soldier so I'm like because I'm in a hospital where it's knee and hip replacements and amputations from diabetes
So as a lot of older people I was probably one of the youngest people in the hospital at 30
I was definitely in the best shape
You know like I remember my first physiotherapy session
She hands me a four pound bean bag weight with a strap on it
She says oh I strap that around your leg and you know trying to like you know maybe maybe 15 or 20 leg raises
If you think you can and I'm like
Uh-huh
Where's the squat rack here
So I strap it I'm like four pounds is that enough and she's like oh yeah
We don't want to start too hard nice sweet lady great person
I love her the best she can she's what she knows
She's doing what she knows
I strap the thing to my stump and I start doing leg raises
And she comes back like 10 minutes later
She's like so how many did you get done? I'm like
I don't know
I'm wondering how much maybe 250 she's like oh oh
And I'm like yeah, I'm in shape
It was just meat and bone smash like I don't have any other injuries here
But there it's San Antonio
The lead therapist is tackling and wrestling with a blind legless marine and I'm like that's what I need
I need to be around soldiers and people who know how I think and I can't help
Again, and I'm not trying to criticize or or be overly
Um
Determental to the results of what came
But imagine if I had had that treatment
What you know people would say oh jodey you did fine you did great you're the poster boy
Imagine if I had been in San Antonio
You know where could have ate faster you think not well
The level of expectation where I was was very very low
So they didn't like so if I had been in San Antonio
They'd been like well, no, no, you will be walking by March
You will do this and you whereas
Where I was because that's how they do it
It's like well we'll see where you're at you know and this and that and there is no
There's no one for me to mentor under or be you know like there's no one to be compared to or should be compared to
Look at this guy over here he's grappling with another dude
Even though he's blind is missing a leg
Yeah, and are you ready to get it on?
Yeah, you know another guy came in I think he was a marine too
And he was wearing just like a t-shirt
And the same guy is like hey
Where's your issue PT kit?
The Marine Corps doesn't play around
And this was the green break guy right but he's but
Because it's a mixed force right there's Air Force Navy Marine whoever's there
There was a there is a Navy I believe she was Navy EOD had her arms blown off
And she was recently in that range 15 movie I think it's the same girl
I've only met one girl who had both her arms blown off by by an EOD by an IED
But so I imagine it's her but anyway
He expected you to be a soldier regardless of what happened to you
You're gonna maintain that persona son and I was like yeah
Because I could feel myself slipping at this other place because there's no expectations
You know and you can only self-mote
And having never had my legs blown off before
I could only me self-mote of eight to a point for so long
And be the guy, be my own drill surgeon and be my own
And be my own inspector and there's a reason and I say this all the time
There's a reason why the best athletes in the world have coaches
Yeah
That's the fact that somebody has got to show you the way
And furthermore you can only push yourself so hard
I know for a fact you can only push yourself to a hundred and seven percent
A coach is gonna get you to a hundred and seventeen percent
Yeah
Push you a little bit harder to have no mercy
And so that's what you need, that's what everybody's
Yeah
You know and so but again I try to give credit where credits do and give
You know people were worried when I wrote the book
There were people I heard that were worried
And I'm not I don't want to shit on anyone
And I don't want it to seem like I'm blaming anyone for anything
I put myself there I'm the one that wanted to be in that spot to step on that landline
My only expectation was that others would have put the preparation into their mission
As I put into mine and I do feel that there were some at very high levels
That maybe didn't take things as seriously as they should have
Or realized the consequences of what was coming
And take best practices from places like Walter Reed San Antonio
Because when I said San me to San Antonio and send a Canadian physiotherapist with me
And she's gonna learn in the three or six months
I'm there more than she will in twenty years at any Canadian base
It was oh well we appreciate that medic
But you know we're working on a Canadian solution
And I was like well that's gonna be awesome
Once you figure out whatever the fuck that is what about me
I'm talking about right this second we have a facility willing to take us
So did they send PT's down there?
No
Because here's here's the back room stuff
The politics
Joe what would the civilians think if we were sending our soldiers to a different country's medical centers
When we got hospitals right here
Now again what we were getting at the hospital was not bad care
You know what I'm saying?
Do you understand the distinction trying to make it?
Okay, okay
It was it was the best care to the capability and the knowledge and understanding that they had
Not only of their job but of the people that they were working with
Yeah, in other words you got if you got a 72 year old diabetic that has an amplitude
The 4 pound weight is good and that you can try and transfer that over to Joe
Dmitik who just got off the battlefield three weeks ago
Yeah, he's a different animal
Yeah, because you're an exception too right to like what they what they're trained and what they're really good at caring for
You come in and this is like this isn't really typical that we all have to deal with
Yeah, why are we gonna change our whole system?
Yeah, exactly but even things like I remember the first couple nurses that came into my room
They were like oh hey honey, what happened with car accident?
Rean a motorcycle you're on a motor really well losing your foot is very typical of motorcycle accident
But they didn't I'm like oh I stepped on a landmine and Afghanistan we even have soldiers in Afghanistan
Yeah, and I was like oh so hence hence this part of the book
Ironically one of the biggest emotional problems I had to deal with was the anger I felt towards a medical system
That did not seem to be able to respond appropriately to my needs
Now you ended up putting on weight because you couldn't exercise
And you do give a little shout out right here to the dairy queen
And you say the dairy queen is delicious when you're depressed
Oh, it's so good.
Once it hits the lips
The peanut butter cups and it's worldly ice cream
I might have to get one right after this jacco
We might have to find a dairy queen up in here
So in conjunction with the therapy sessions
I also started taking an anti-depressant to start to help control my moods
And then there was the other kind of pain the physical kind I was still using pain killers to dull the pain that was there each and every day
I needed that relief so badly but in the end that too caused me tremendous suffering
And I turned into something I never thought I would be an addict
We've definitely our scene this happened with our wounded veterans
And here you go. In no time I was taking more of the drug that I was supposed to in order to relieve my psychological and physical pain
The addiction worsened and I started crushing the pills into a powder and snorting it to get a better high
Those pills gave me relief from my stress and mental pain if only for a little while
But as soon as they wore off, my demons would return
I worried about my future
If I wasn't a soldier who was I
And you've already said that a bunch of times that feeling of I mean everything you'd been in your life
From when you were a kid that was what was inside of you and then you were able to act on that
And become that soldier serving combat get after it on the battlefield
My whole adult life I became a man in the military
I joined as a 17 year old, 174 pound, 6 foot, 4 skinny weakling
I grew into the man that you see and that question when I was reading that
When I had a buddy that retired the other day
You know, 25 years
And I just said to him I said, now was it clean now your locker
Because I don't know what it's like for you guys but in the sealed teams you have a locker
And that's your whole career is physically represented
And the lockers are big. They're walking lockers. They're awesome
Oh wow, each guy has a walking locker
And there's a big drawing we call them a drying cage or calm cages because it's just made with a chain link
Basically, but each guy has their own, their own, their own, this is big is this office
You've got cruise boxes in there and it's your whole career is physically represented
Of everything you've ever been issued anything that you picked up along the way
Trinkets, everything is in your drying cage
And when you retire
You go, you clean out your cage, it's empty, you sweep out the floor, you glowed into your van
You drive home and that's it, it's over
And so I said to my buddy there, I said, you know, how was it?
How was it clean out your drying cage?
Because for me, I wasn't even worried about retiring
I'm like, okay, I gotta go do this, I gotta do this, I'm all good, come back
Clean it out my cage
And I'm like, oh, this is over
And for me, I spent 18 out of 20 years out here on the west coast
And all within like a stone's throw of the different buildings
I mean, all within these certain number of buildings
Since I was a kid
And the question, so when I was reading that you wrote this
That's what I was thinking about
What my buddy was thinking
If I'm not a soldier, if I'm not a seal, then what am I?
And that's a tough question to answer
For a lot of guys
It's brutal and it comes back to what we were talking about before
Dwelling
Right
I, it was really hard for me because I didn't choose to leave
I'd always imagine I'd be abounded
I don't know why, like, you know, visualization is very important
In my opinion, in our line of work
And so I'd always try to envision a good being wound, okay, but it was like the cool scar across the cheek
Or like some shrapnel in the rib cage
I could show off a barbecue, you know, and talk about when I'm like 80
Yeah, so I've got some Taliban and menl in there
But, you know, like, it's that or it's a body bag
You don't think about the in-between
Even our system, right, our medical system and Canada
Lots of body bags, lots of bandages
But, the in-between part, they kind of dropped the ball
Yeah, and years ago
World War I probably World War II, you wouldn't have made it
They wouldn't have to deal with you
No, because you would have blood out
They didn't know teach RippleC, they wouldn't have gotten your calves back
I mean, it would have been you would have died, that's all the rest of it
Yeah, double amputation, yeah, forget about it
So they just didn't have that back then
Vietnam got a lot better
In terms of the Casivac situation, they could have a lot faster
That's why you don't have a lot more of it
But, figure out what you're going to do next
And you held onto it, you held onto it, you tried to hang onto it
Because you decided you know what, I'm going to still be a soldier
Yeah, you got done with it, you did a half marathon
But after that half marathon, you were just to beat up
Yeah, from that, and you decided that
Well, here's what you put in the book, I tell people
That Jodie the soldier was wounded in January of 2007
But it took him about two years to die
To let the soldier in you go
And I'm going to continue
Of course, this wasn't an easy decision for me
And I was filled with rage and anger
And again, I started using oxy-coctin
As a relief from the pain of loss
It became my problem yet again
But I diluted myself into believing I had it under my control
You talk about this thing where you're reading a reader's digest article
Yeah, and there's an oxy-coctin addict in there
Yeah, and he's talking about how he's shooting it up
And you said to yourself, you weren't thinking, oh, that's horrible
I can't believe you're like, I didn't know you could answer that
And that is what hits you
Yeah, and I think that is what hits you
Realizing that's when you realize you weren't in control
I mean, that's got to be that moment
Because the story was he was a doctor, I believe, injecting himself
In the bathroom and his young daughter walked in
And I had now had a young daughter
And I could just, I now am like, and in my mind, it wasn't
Oh, imagine if my daughter caught me going to inject, I went, oh, I can inject
And I even went through a second way
I remember how great it was to get the intervenes drugs in the hospital
And then the next second was, oh, this is not good
This is not good
And then when I ended up buying, I ended up buying per cassette, which is like
Goxie cotton, but like, from a guy that I knew through another guy
And it was they were in Ziplock bags
Basically a drug deal
Remember that thing they got me arrested 20 years ago
And I went, okay, this is it, this ends here
Well, that's an awesome, I mean, that's awesome credit to you all that
Because so many people, unfortunately they don't take ownership of that
They don't say to themselves, you know what?
I am addicted and this thing is controlling me
And they always say things like just what you said, oh, I got this under control
I can stop if I want to, I just don't want to
I need it, I'm in pain
There he go
I had to take it
Yeah
And I would ask the doctors, I would say, how do we get, how do we get me off this?
And this was still, you know, oh seven, oh eight
Nine, I think it was 2011 before I finished
Or got off them
They still had, and candidly, anyway, hadn't realized what oxy cotton was capable of
And so the dogs, it's like three days of withdrawals
It's fine, don't worry about it
Those withdrawals were worse than being wounded
Those three days, here's your quote
Those three days were absolute horror
Quitting oxy cotton was harder and more painful
Then getting blown up in Afghanistan
Yeah
Because, because it was three days
Whereas I was in the worst
Jocco echo, I cannot tell you what the pain was like
Because it was so bad
And that was the pain from going from withdrawals
No, the pain from getting blown up
Okay, so the pain from getting blown up
I cannot describe it to you
But the withdrawals lasted three days of that kind of pain
Because your body and your mind are trying to trick you
You're still in pain, man, you're still in pain, you should take him, you should take him
But once, you know what's funny?
Though the three days, it's almost like you hit a switch
And suddenly the pain starts to dissipate
The hollow feeling in your chest
And just to fill back in
The that stop crawling on your skin
Because that's ergoing through all that
I was grinding the stumps of my legs into the coach
To give it some kind of other sensation
Other than I described it as like
It was like a dog, you ever watch a dog chew on a bone
When he's going to between his paws and he's just going to town
Like with his teeth, that's what it felt like
On the ends of my legs
my legs was like I had like an animal just knowing on my legs. And then one day of you know
wherever the third or second and two and a half for three days later I realized I'm like
oh most of that's kind of pretty much gone. It's crazy. And I tell you there's Jodi before
he quit ox cotton and then there's Jodi a Jodi before he quit was still trying his best
and doing well and if you talked to anybody was the guy a lot of people looked up to but
things really started to turn around after I quit. You know I really started to become
capable of a lot in my mind I think there's a big difference. But man that shit just my
buddy he's a he's a parrot trooper and he had to get some surgery on his knee. You know
parrot troopers are always banging up their knees and the dogger gave him a coating or
a ton of three or something like that and he literally took it and threw it in the garbage.
He's like I saw it out in a jodi. I just like I don't even I don't want anything.
And that's my advice kids out there do not take it if you don't if you can greet your
teeth enough do not take that shit. Stay clean. Do your best. I wouldn't trust me around it now.
If you had one I might take it. I don't it's good. Let's just take some more of this
alphabet brain. Take the alphabet brain. I'll get on it instead of getting addicted again.
Get off it by getting on it. So now you get through it you're not addicted to
oxycod anymore and now it's what do my gonna do with my life. Yeah and here you go. What did I
actually want and what was possible and could I really put my military pass behind me and
pursue something else that would make me feel fulfilled but it was time to stop asking questions.
It was time to find some answers.
And here you're kind of referring back and it's the last chapter. It's called on my own two feet.
I would actually still get a sense of humor after all this. Can't make fun of yourself man.
Taking life way to series. So a lot of professional athletes will tell you they missed
two things when they retire the competition on the field and the camaraderie with the team late
teammates in the locker room. It's the exact same thing for soldiers after we leave the armed forces.
When I see soldiers on parade I still get chills down my spine because I loved it so much.
Just letting everybody know that that's completely normal. For all you guys that got out for
whatever reason totally normal. Jody feels it. I feel it. We all feel that.
So then you went and did the amazing race in Canada. Yeah we had the you got second place with your brother.
Second place and it was the first season because the American amazing race was the most popular
show in Canada. So let's make a Canadian. Let's make a Canadian one. If Canadians love anything
more than the American version it's the Canadian version. Then you ended up doing this city councilor thing.
Yeah. And that's where you're at now. That's where I'm at now.
You know one part that we haven't talked about and I'm gonna do it a little bit of
uh I'm gonna score a few brownie points here at home. So I said they had to plow a road to me. Yeah.
To rescue me right. They literally plowed a road with a combat bulldozer and right behind it was what
we call a buys and ambulance and it's an eight-wheeled almost built in the same factory as the LAV in Ontario.
And London Ontario Canada by unionized workers and and the commander of that vehicle was
master corpola lana Gilmore of the Canadian forces medical corps who is now my wife retired
surgeon a lana Gilmore of the Canadian forces medical corps and we have two beautiful daughters
Aela seven and cure a four and we we we managed to connect I was wounded in January we connected
in September or Octoberish of the same of 2007 my girlfriend that I had had when I got wounded had
left no fault of hers I don't blame her one one bit you know to get thrown into a situation where
you have to care for a wounded soldier a guy who before was like a rock you know and that's not what
she signed up for right and and and a lana had recently broken up with with with her partner as well
and when we found each other though the fact that she was a hot Irish blonde was just really
a bonus got to be honest and and she took one you know jocco I call medics they're like
our momies what do you guys have corps men you call them because combat guys were little
loads that saying if you're gonna be tough you if you're gonna be dumb you got to be tough
you're gonna be stupid you got to be tough yeah and that's and that's us we need the corpsmen
or the medic to be like hey hey hey jocco why are you limping what come here come here
come here come here no no no not in front of the other troops mom stop it stop it and and so that's
their job so she saw me she took one look at me she's like you look terrible I was surviving on
vector cereal and drive through sandwiches because I was by myself all the boys were still deployed
or on course and I was living in my own private house on base so I'd moved on to base I had this
little puppy Charlie who wasn't he's not a service dog by any stretch but he's the only
reason I got it a bed in the morning so I owe him he's still my buddy still at that he's at the
house right now and so she went into medic mode really she went you know what you should come
by my house bring your dog you can play with my dog and you know let's just hang out and when we got
when we saw each other though it was camaraderie she was one of the last people to see me on the
battlefield she carried my stretcher to the to the to the evac chopper and you know if you talk to her
the fact that I was you know a bearded hot guy was just a bonus to her too and you know
eventually I let her kiss me guys okay passively I'm sure yeah now she likes she she's going to
ask me did you tell jockel the same joke you tell everyone else that I kissed you but when we we got
pregnant a little quick a Elizabeth A September do the math so but you know we realized
we talked about it when we talked about the survivors guilt you don't you didn't survive
you know your friends live for your friends I didn't survive and she didn't like her vehicle hit
landmines and she was ambushes and all you know near near death on a battlefield is a bullet
going in from your head that's near death yeah you laugh about it after but that's so she was in
all that too and so she's pregnant and and I should have died and who knows what could have happened
to her and who were we to deny what's happening you know so I I have I had to throw that out there
that you know I have three beautiful blondes in my life with blue eyed blondes that you know
keep me in check and because I the the feelings I had in the book they're not all in the past
you know I woke up yesterday when I missed the flight man it it was more
that I was disappointing you right and hear me out right because I was just like I was like
I'm the city counselor and a lot of guys look up to me and this and that and all you know
like got these kids and you know Lanna and I and I still can't make a fucking flight you know
and I haven't even met the guy yet and I'm already disappointing him and that went through me
and it's all because I stepped on that stupid landline but I wouldn't even be here if I had
stepped on that landline I wouldn't have had these I wouldn't have these kids if I hadn't
stepped on that landline after my second fiance walked out of the house and my you know like
all I said that's my joke I like all good soldiers I have three ex fiancees and it does an
ex girlfriend's sacrifice to the queen because we still swear allegiance to the queen
because it's real that's like you said the teams come first and I had said well I'm going to retire
about 44 with 25 years in so why don't I just start kids and I'll add that and I'm sure my life
would be fine if I hadn't stepped on the landline but would it be as fulfilling would I be as as as
as broad or would I be as complete I'm sure I'd be a kickass speck-op sniper somewhere doing
something but I couldn't have met like if if I had a wish to not step on the mine but I wouldn't
get to keep the kids I'd step on that mine 10 times at a ten and so I had to you know I'd throw
it in there and give credit to Lana for what she did for me and also my friends and family right
this nobody does it no one's a rock you know so I just had to say all that yeah no and I actually
I have a question about your wife okay I was going to keep you an opportunity to steal some of your
thunder not at all not at all I'm glad you I'm glad you put that out there and also I didn't want
to steal thunder from your book right and it was one of the things that I was going to tell people I mean
obviously I think people who's going to buy this I mean obviously I there's this is the a big book
which I've taken some excerpts out of yeah and there's so much more in it when you read it
and you get the whole the whole package one of which is you explaining these relationships
with your wife with your kids how that happened which is just I mean for all practical purposes
let's just call it what it is that's a miracle yeah
here's how it closes out people often ask me if I regret my time in afghanistan because it
cost me my two feet and completely changed my life if you live your life with regrets then you
never move forward those six months in afghanistan before the explosion were some of the best
times of my life I can honestly say as I look back on my life in the military I wouldn't
have changed a thing if I hadn't stepped on that landmine I would never have connected with a
Lana I would never have had two beautiful daughters my mind and body were pushed to the limit
after my accident and ironically I came out on the other side a better more complete person
maybe life would be easier now if I hadn't lost a part of both legs but it certainly wouldn't have
been any more complete when I when I am in public today advocating for veterans rights or simply
going about my daily life people sometimes approach me to say thank you for your service
those five words mean more to me than anything else
and now I'd like to say something jodie from me
and on behalf of every american Canadian Brit australian and arrested a free world
thank you for your service and your inspiration to all of us
to overcome obstacles and to make a difference in the world
thank you thank you man and you got to tear my eye right now don't do it you're on YouTube no doubt no doubt
thank you juggle thank you too for your service don't thank me and I think that's going to be
enough for tonight so if you haven't got this feeling yet you're listening to podcasts
I know you're going to want to go out and get this book it's called unflinching the making of a
Canadian sniper by my man right here jodie medic it's what you want to read about
that's right and you can get it anywhere books are bought you can get on amazon
I recommend for my american cousins use amazon through uh what is it the jocco podcast
the jocco store he wants to go through jocco store I like your recommendations there go to the
jocco store click on the amazon link so jocco gets a little piece of the pie the paper back is out
so you save a few bucks and be a nontr to uh to have you guys read my book
if you uh you're on social media the web I do the webs web yeah jodie medic jodi mint i
see on twitter instagram snapchat and facebook snapchat i have no idea how to snapchat with
everything everybody uses it jodie medic yeah i'm a people use it okay i'm convinced
it was not gonna judge okay not gonna judge yeah i find jodie medic on instagram facebook
twitter and for all you 14 year olds out there you can get them on snapchat hey the 14 year olds
need to hear this that's true actually probably need to hear it so snapchat is becoming like a real
right yeah yeah i think it originated as that kind of it's like hey let me send you this
isn't this kind of cool undercover and it goes away i'm convinced it was a dick pick it's
a third out for some of the send it pick yeah and then someone found a legit weighted network or some
that's so it's a real deal now on well certainly so even the rock is on the snapchat right on
and honor sure um i uh the chances of me being here tonight are are are very limited we have
twitter to thank literally one of my fans and one of your fans basically had had locked us on twitter
and made us talk to each other and uh and i became a fan when you were on the rogue and show
and podcasting you know i we talked a little bit at lunch it it really helped me when i was going
through some rough times and you know i want to thank you for let me come down here to this
beautiful city and and do this for me and you know thank you for writing your book and being who you
are and and echo thanks for for helping him make this happen and you know i got a podcast i'm
starting the jodimitic podcast and uh their may or may not be an episode up uh and the next couple
days but if people want to look for me there as well i'd be honored to try and entertain them as closely
as you do and uh and as and as all the other podcasts i love to and you know i just do this to try and
be me you know i don't know who the new jodimitic is i call i'm calling myself jodie three point
old right now uh and and and and and this life is a trip you know i call myself a student of the
human condition and i'm always learning i'm always learning and i and i love to meet new people and
um yeah that's all i want to say right now man i appreciate this a lot you have no idea
well we appreciate everything that you've done as i've already said to everybody else out that
that's listed i think we're gonna actually continue this on and we're gonna go to a q and a
on the next podcast and we'll just roll that out afterwards but for right now and for this
evening i think that's all about all we've got so everyone that's out there that listen to this
that knows that a person can go to some depths and can climb right back out of those depths
get out there and get after it until next time this is echo and jodie and jockel out